DOCUMENTS OF JEWISH SECTARIES 


VOLUME I 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 

EDITED 

FROM HEBREW MANUSCRIPTS IN THE CAIRO GENIZAH COLLECTION 
NOW IN THE POSSESSION OF THE UNIVERSITY 
LIBRARY, CAMBRIDGE 


AND PROVIDED WITH 

AN ENGLISH TRANSLATION, INTRODUCTION AND NOTES 


S! SCHECHTER, M.A., Litt.D. (Cantab.) 

President of the Jewish Theological Seminary of America in New York 


Cambridge : 
at the University Press 
1910 



icrosofi 


Cambrige: 

PRINTED BY JOHN CLAY, M. A. 
AT THE UNIVERSITY PRESS 


Di j i ( izeJ b v Mic / os o iffr 


TO 

THE HONOURABLE JACOB H. SCHIFF 


toi/ce pev ovv h peyaXo-^v^la oiov Kocrpos Tts eivat 
twv dpeTwv. 


Aristotle, Ethics. 


VirjtbzoJ by Micros ^: r " 


Digitized by Microsoft r ' 


PREFACE 


T HE two groups of fragments appearing herewith under the title of 
Documents of Jewish Sectaries, were all discovered in the Cairo 
Genizah, the greatest part of which is now in the possession of the Cambridge 
University Library, England, and marked as the Taylor-Schechter Collection. 
They are published here for the first time, each group in a separate 
volume. The first volume contains the group bearing the title Fragments 
of a Zadokite Work, which title was supplied by me on a hypothesis. 
The second volume reproduces Fragments of the Book of the 
Commandments by Anan, which title was also supplied by me, but which 
may be accepted as a certainty. The importance of the first volume, which 
I have little doubt will prove a valuable contribution to the history of early 
Jewish Sects, suggested to me the advisability of furnishing the student with 
an English translation accompanying the text. The risk of giving a 
translation of such a defective text as the Fragments of a Zadokite Work 
unfortunately represent, was great indeed, and I was fully aware of 
it. This risk I felt not less when writing the Introduction and the 
Notes to the text, but I preferred to be blamed for my mistakes and 
be corrected, than be praised for my prudence of non-committal, which 
policy I do not always think worthy of a student. All I could do was 

both in the Introduction and in the Notes to call the attention of the 

reader to the unfortunate condition of our text. In the Notes in 
particular, I have especially marked many passages as obscure, the meaning 
of which was unclear to me. The literalness of the translation, to which 
I kept throughout, will, I believe, make the inherent shortcomings of the 
original fairly transparent. Words or phrases based on an emendation 

of the original which was evident to me are marked by asterisks. No 
student who has had experience in editing texts can fail to see at 

once that very little can be taken for certain, and the largest part of the 
commentary and the conclusions based on it in the Introduction can only 
be regarded as tentative. 

The divisions into paragraphs were supplied by me, so as to enable 
the student to form some notion of the variety of matter touched upon 
in our fragments. I must further point out that by some oversight, which 
is excusable enough in view of the distance of my residence from the 


Digitized by Microsoft f'> 


VI 


PREFACE 


place of publication, I had no opportunity to read the last proof of Text 
A of the first volume. I therefore collated this text again with the 
manuscript, and this collation resulted in a few new readings, which are 
incorporated in the Corrections and Additions at the end of the volume, 
to which especial attention is called. 1 have added also a facsimile of 
a page of text A and text B, thus offering an opportunity to scholars to 
make a fresh search in Genizah material. Nobody will rejoice more 
than I, if this should lead to the discoveries, though they be made 
“ almost simultaneously,” of fresh fragments, which will further elucidate the 
history of the sect, even should they prove to upset my theories. 

Much less was the labour spent upon the second volume, D'DIDDlp 
pyS mvon Fragments of the Book of the Commandments by 

Anan. My contribution to its elucidation consists only in giving at the 
end of the text the necessary references to the Bible. Occasionally 
references will also be found to Dr A. Harkavy’s Studien und Mittheilungen, 
part 8 (nVJIOlp , E0!p'? ) 2nd part, St Petersburg, 1903). I have no further 
comment to make on it, as the subject does not fall within the province of 
my studies, except that I hope it will prove a valuable contribution to 
the early Karaitic literature, and form a subject of discussion by specialists. 

In conclusion, it gives me much pleasure to record here my thanks 
to Professor Israel Friedlaender, of the Jewish Theological Seminary of 
America, in New York, and Professor Henry Maker, of the Dropsie 
College, in Philadelphia, who were helpful in furnishing me with 
translations from Kirkisani and other Arabic texts, quoted in my 
first volume. I have further to record here my thanks to Professor 
Alexander Marx, of the Seminary, who enriched this volume with many 
a suggestion. His experience in the reading of manuscripts proved also 
many a time of great aid to me. To my friend Norman Bentwich of 
London I am also under obligations for aid given to me in various directions. 
The Index was prepared by Mr Joseph B. Abrahams, Secretary of the 
Seminary, who was always at my call during the correction of the proofs, 
and to whom I express here my best thanks. 


New York, 
June 1910. 


S. SCHECHTER. 


Digivzoo by Microsoft 


CONTENTS 


PAGE 

Preface v 

Introduction ix 

English Translation and Notes xxxi 

Corrections to the Hebrew Text lvii 

Additions and Corrections to Translation and Notes . lix 

Titles of some of the Works quoted in the Introduction . lx 

Index to Bible, Apocrypha and Rabbinical Works in the Notes lxi 

Hebrew Original i 

PLATES 

Facsimile of page I, Text A, to face p. i 

„ „ „ 20, „ B, between pp. lxiv and 20 


Oiaurfea oy ;,Ucrcscii / 


Digitized fry Microsoft 


INTRODUCTION 


The two texts included in this volume reproduce the contents of two 
fragments in MS. coming originally from the Cairo Genizah and now in 
the possession of the University Library of Cambridge, England. They 
form a part of the Taylor-Schechter Collection, and bear the class- marks : 
T.-S. io K 6 and T.-S. 16 31 1. They will be designated here as Text A 
and Text B. 

Text A extending from page 1 to 16 (inclusive) consists of eight 
leaves, or sixteen pages, measuring 8^ x 7^ in. The first four leaves, or 
eight pages, count 2 1 lines on each page, whilst the last four leaves (or 
eight pages) differ in the number of lines, pp. 9 — 12 having 23 lines. 
Pages 13 — 16 are mutilated at the bottom of each page, so that it is 
impossible to determine with any accuracy how many lines they may have 
had, but it was assumed in the notes that they contained 23 lines as the 
preceding four pages. The writing is ancient Oriental, in square characters, 
but rather stiff, and there is very little consistency in such letters as ', 1, 
the latter being occasionally so long as almost to be taken for a final J, 
whilst the ' is sometimes so large as to be confused with a 1. The H also 
greatly resembles the Pi, the left stroke reaching the roof of the letter, 
but this is a feature common to all ancient Oriental MSS. The MS. 
probably dates from the 10th century 7 . Here and there we have letters 
provided with Babylonian or Palestinian vowel-points (p. i, 11 . 9, 10, 11, 
18, 20, 21 ; p. 2, 11. 11, 16, 19; p. 3, 11. 8, 9 ; p. 5, 11. 8, 12, 16, 21 ; p. 6, 
11. 6, 13), but the latter seem to have been added by a hand of a more 
recent date. Some words are crossed through by the scribe (p. 11, 11 . 13, 
16; p. 12, 1 . .17), as indicated in the text. The MS. is possibly defective 
at the beginning and is certainly so at the end. Pages 13 — 16 are badly 
mutilated, both on the edges and at the bottom of the page. The MS. 
is also torn and obliterated in some other places, by which a few words 
or letters are affected 1 . Besides the missing pages at the end and at the 
beginning, there is a lacuna between p. 8 and p. 9, the MS. breaking up 
at the end of a line, and perhaps in the middle of a sentence. It is 
impossible to determine how many pages may be missing here. I have 
also indicated such a lacuna at the end of p. 12, but have subsequently 

1 See texts and notes of p. 3, 1 . 2 ; p. 6 , 1 . 19 ; but especially the text and notes of the last four pages. 

S. (Frags. A & B) b 


rot 


X 


INTRODUCTION’ 


come to the conclusion to consider it as continuous. As will be seen from 
the Notes, we have here to deal with a very careless scribe, who not only 
may have had a very poor copy before him, but also disfigured his text in 
several places by his inability to read his MS. correctly (p. i, 1 . 12; p. 3, 
1. 7; p. 5, 1. 15; p. 8, 1. 3; p. 10, 1. 21; p. 11, 1. 9; p. 13, 1. 6; p. 16, 
1. 2, text and notes). 

Text B, covering pages 19 and 20, consists of one leaf, or two pages, 
measuring 13J x 8 in., written in square characters, but already with a 
tendency to cursive. Some words are also provided with Babylonian and 
Palestinian vowel-points (p. 19, 11 . 2, 15, 34, 35; p. 20, 11 . 2, 3, 7, 8, ii, 
14, 16, 19, 20, 24, 33); other words, again, are cancelled by the scribe 
himself (p. 20, 11 . 5-— 6). It is undoubtedly of a later date than Text A 
(perhaps the 11th or 12th century), but the scribe must have been more 
careful and also had a better copy before him. Perhaps it will be more correct 
to speak of it as another recension of the same Text, as the differences are of 
such a nature that they cannot always be accounted for by the mere careless- 
ness of the scribe of Text A or by such mere variants inevitable in two 
MSS. of the same text. This will be best seen by a comparison of the two 
texts, which on pp. 7 — 8 overlap each other, and the English translation 
of which appears in parallel columns. 

Apart from the defective state of the MS. owing to age, or the careless- 
ness of the scribe, its whole contents, at least as they are represented by 
Text A, are in a very fragmentary state, leaving the impression that we 
are dealing with extracts from a larger work, put together, however, in a hap- 
hazard way, with little regard to completeness or order. This is particularly 
discernible in the legal part. Thus we have on p. 7, 1. 8 (=p. 19, 1 . 5) a reference 
to the laws concerning vows, which is practically not taken up again till p. 16, 
1 . 5. Page 10, 11 . 4 — 10, again forming the beginning of what we may call the 
constitution of the Sect and its organization, is suddenly broken off by laws 
bearing upon Levitical purity, covering about four lines, from which the 
scribe abruptly passes to Sabbath laws, covering the last ten lines of p. 10, 
and the whole of p. 11. Then he gives us another law of Levitical purity, 
covering about a line and a half, but followed by laws bearing upon the 
Sabbath, upon the relation of the Sect to heathens, upon dietary laws, taking 
up the larger part of p. 12 (from line 2 to line 15), and concluding with two 
Levitical purity laws, condensed in two short paragraphs (p. 11, 11 . 15 — 18). 
It is here, where he returns again to the constitution of the Sect and its 
organization, extending to about the end of p. 14; whilst pp. 15 and 16 
represent laws relating to oaths and vows (p. 1 1, 11. 1 — 4) ; laws bearing upon 
the treatment of penitents (p. 1 5, 1. 5 to end) ; and again, laws relating to vows 
and free offerings to the altar. In other parts of the MS. we have the same 


Digitized by Microsoft r " 


INTRODUCTION 


XI 


feeling of abruptness and incompleteness; as for instance, on p. 3, 11. 12 — 1 6, 
where we may assume that the reference to the seasons and festivals was 
followed by a lengthy exposition of the calendar of the Sect. Possibly the 
scribe omitted it as being in his view a mere repetition of the Book of 
Jubilees. Page 4, 1. 4, again, fc/MTS 030 etc., we could expect a list of the 
names of the leaders of the Sect, and their history ; but of this no trace 
is left in our text. 

The language of the MS. is for the most part pure Biblical Hebrew. 
The first three pages rise even to the dignity of Scriptural poetry, though 
a good deal of it is obscured by the unfortunate condition in which the 
text is at present. But there are in it terms and expressions which 

occur only in the Mishna or even only in the Rabbinic literature dating 

from the first centuries of the Middle Ages. Such are : 

t?1131 p. 2, 1. 9 ; p. 4, 1. 4 ; etc. ; cf. especially p. 6, 1. 14. 130 p. 3, 1. 10. 

oxn 3 o tidt p. 4, 1. 21. ran cn ox nxm p. 5, 1. 7. nmyn p. 5, 1. 9. 
ywb ot p. 10, 1. 3. SiS: p . 10, 1. 14. vwtb p. 10, 1. 19. 

plfiH p. 10, 1. 22. 03V33 p. ii, 1. 8. 'U and DTJ (in the sense of the 

Gentiles) p. 1 1, 1. 13 and p. 12, 1. 9. IHItyooS p. 11, 1. 20. T13n 

p. 12,1. 8. poos p. 14, 1. 20. ptpno p. 16, 1. 2. onion tma p. 20, 1. 7. 

The term OIOOlI’O 0'3 (p. 11, 1. 22) for a place of worship, even 
suggests a much later influence. It is, however, not impossible that all 
such expressions pointing to a later date are mere substitutions by the 
later scribe for the original terms. The term “pD again (p. 7, 1. 6 , etc.), 
occurring frequently in the sense of custom (=3030 or t23t?D), is almost 
entirely unknown otherwise in the Hebrew literature. Strange also is the way 
in which citations from the Scriptures extending over the greatest part of the 
Bible are introduced without regard to strict consistency. The usual 3 DX 3 i? 
is entirely absent and replaced by 00X 0i?X3, or 'X Oi?Nl (p. 4, 1. 20 ; p. 7, 11. 8, 
14, 16 ; p. 9, 1. 2 ; p. 16, 11. 6, 15 ; p. 20, 1. 16), followed occasionally by 
the name of the prophet, as OP'D 00X, or 'X 0^01 (p. 5 , 1. 8 ; p. 8 , 1. 14 ; p. 19, 
1. 26) or rVJKT TON TPX (p. 6 , 1. 7) or bxpiiT TDX TPN (p. 19 , 1. 11 ). Some- 
times, we have even Sx 00X Tt?X or Sx OOX 0t?X3 (p. 6, 1. 13 ; p. 8, 1. 9 ; 
cf. p. 9, 1. 7). The same expression is also used with reference to the 
Pseudcpigrapha 3pJ0 |3 tS DO’Sy OOX Tt?X 2 . In other places we have the 
more familiar 3103 T£?X3 or 31033 or T3 3103 (p. 5, 1. 1 ; p. 7 , 1. 19 ; p. 9, 1. 5 ; 
p. 11, 11 . 17, 20; p. 19, 11. 1 , 7). Sometimes, however, we have embedded 
whole groups of verses from the Scriptures without any introductory formula 
whatever, which in some places at least may be due to a mere clerical 
error (p. 5, 1 . 13 ; p. 8, 1 . 2). Altogether, the quotations from the Scriptures 

2 See also with reference to other non-Canonical books, p. 8, 1 . 20; p. 10, 11 . 9, 10. 

b 2 


Nil 


INTRODUCTION 


are seldom correctly given, so that sometimes the source is hardly recogniz- 
able (p. 2, 1 . ii ; p. 5, 1 . 14 seq. ; p. 7, 1 . 1 1 ; p. 8, 1 . 3). As a rule these 
deviations from the Massoretic text are mere textual corruptions of a care- 
less scribe and not to be explained by the variae lectiones suggested by 
any known version, or quotation by any ancient authority. A specially 
noteworthy feature to which attention should be drawn is the absence of 
the Tetragrammaton or any other Biblical appellation for God besides 
^N, which is consistently used in both texts. 

The contents of the MS. are in their present state about equally divided 
between Hagada and Halacha. The first part (pp. 1 — 8), dealing largely 
with matter of an historical and doctrinal nature, and the second part being 
chiefly occupied with subjects of a rather legal character. The Hagada as 
well as the Halacha represent apparently the constitution and the teachings 
of a Sect long ago extinct, but in which we may perhaps easily detect 
the parent of later schisms with which history dealt more leniently. 

The defective state of the MS. and the corrupt condition of the text 
in so many places make it impossible to draw a complete picture of the 
Sect. Yet what remains offers us a few distinct features and salient points 
enabling us to catch a few glimpses of the history of the Sect, its claims 
and its relation to the rest of the nation. 

First, as to its history: After the completion of 390 years, forming 
the End of the Wrath (p. 1, 1 . 5) or as it is termed in another place, “the 
end of the desolation of the land ” (p. 5, 1. 20), begun with the delivering 
of Israel into the hands of Nebuchadnezzar, the King of Babylon, God, 
we are told, made bud from Israel and Aaron a branch to inherit his 
land (p. 1, 11 . 6, 7). This would bring us to within a generation of Simon 
the Just, who flourished about 290 B.c. For twenty years, however, closely 
following the End of the Wrath, Israel was blind, groping its way, because 
of the evil effects of the erroneous teachings (or waters of lies) of the Man 
of Scoffing, who led Israel astray. This brings us into the midst of the 
Hellenistic persecutions preceding the Maccabean revolt (about 176 b.c.). 
But at last, as it would seem, this scion from Aaron and Israel overcame 
all difficulties, and was recognized as the Teacher of Righteousness whose 
mission is to make Israel walk in the ways of God (p. 1, 1 . 11, and also 
p. 6, 1. 1 1 ; p. 20, 1. 31), and to undo the evil wrought in a former generation 
(p. 1, 1. 12 and notes). 

This Teacher is also called the “Only Teacher,” or the “Only One” 
(p. 20, 11 . 1, 32), and is identical with “the Lawgiver who Interprets the 
Law” (p. 6, 1. 7) referred to in connection with the princes and nobles 
“who went forth out of the land of Judah” (p. 6, 11 . 5, 6, 8). The activity 
of these latter, though representing both Aaron and Israel (p. 6, 11 . 2, 3), 


Digitized by Microsoft 1 


INTRODUCTION 


xtit 


consisted only in continuing and carrying out the precepts (p. 6, 1. 9 
rYlppiriQ}) 3 of the Lawgiver, in which they were “ to walk in them 
for all end of the wickedness” (p. 6, 1 . 10, text and notes). This 
seems to be the period intervening between the first appearance of the 
Teacher of Righteousness (p. i, 1 . 11) (the founder of the Sect) who was 
gathered in 4 (or died), and the second appearance of the Teacher of 
Righteousness who is to rise in “the end of the days” (p. 6, 1, 11, text and 
notes). Moreover, the Only Teacher, or Teacher of Righteousness is 
identical with or the Anointed One from Aaron and Israel, whose 

advent is expected by the Sect through whom He made them know His 
holy spirit (p. 2, 1 . 1 2), and in whose rise the Sect saw 5 6 the fulfilment of the 
prophecy, “there shall come a star out of Jacob” (p. 7, 1 . 18; cf. note 18). 
Apparently this Anointed One was rejected by the great bulk of the nation 
who “spoke rebellion” against him (p. 5, 1 . 21 ; p. 6, 1 . 1). What must be 
especially noted is that the Messiah of the Sect is a priest, a descendant 
from Aaron and Israel 0 . Of a Messiah descending from Judah, there is 
no mention in our text 7 . Indeed, “after the completing of the end... 
one shall not join the house of Judah,” whilst the princes of Judah, the 
removers of the bound, will be visited by the wrath of God (p. 4, 1 . 11; 
p. 8, 1 . 3, text and notes). Among these princes, King David is also included, 
who is held in slight estimation by the Sect (see below, p. xvii). As a contrast 
to and substitute for David, and his dynasty, the Sect put up Zadok, and his 
descendants (the sons of Zadok). 

These differences, in addition to those still to be discussed, led 
to a complete separation of the Sect from the bulk of the Jewish nation. We 
are further told that they left the land of Judah for the North, and settled in 
the city of Damascus (p. 6, 1 . 5; p. 7, 1 . 19; p. 8, 1 . 21 ; p. 19, 1 . 34; p. 20, 1 . 12). 
They emigrated there under the leadership of the Star (p. 7, 11 . 18, 19), where 
they established a New Covenant 8 . Unfortunately, there is a lacuna in 
our text at the end of p. 8, where the story of the Sect in Damascus was 
probably continued, but we gather from another passage that the Only 
Teacher found his death in Damascus, but is expected to rise again 
(p. 19, 1 . 35 ; p. 20, 1 . 1 ; cf. also p. 6, 1 . 1 1). This disappearance, as it seems, 


3 The meaning of the word is not quite certain, 
but the sense seems to be “ the legislative rules 
laid down by the ppmo.” 

4 The death, or the gathering in of the Teacher is 
stated in p. 19, 1 . 35 ; p. 20, 1 . 1. See also p. 20, 1 . 14. 

See p. 12, I. 23 (pnN'-riVJ'D), p. 19, 1. 10 (ITC’D 
pnx), p. 20, 1. 1 (pnso rvtro), which latter reading 
is supported by p. 1, l. 7. In p. 14, 1. 19 the word 
or mSTD was probably tom off. 

6 Rather obscure is the meaning of in all 


these places, unless it indicates that the mother of 
the Messiah will descend from a lay family. As it 
appears from p. 6, 11 . 2, 3, the Sect insisted that the 
lay element should be represented in all important 
functions. 

7 Cf. Test. Reuben 6 8, and Introduction of 
Dr Charles, p. xcvii. 

8 See p. 6, 1 . 19 and references given there, and 
p. 8, 1. 21. 


V ionized by Microsoft 1,1 


xiv INTRODUCTION 

led to backsliding and apostacy from the Sect, but the backsliders were 
expelled from the Congregation, and admonished to come back to the Station 
of men of perfect holiness (p. 20, 11 . 3, 4 and 5). In case they persisted 
in their apostacy, they and their families had no longer a “ share in the House 
of the Torah” (p. 20, 11 . 10, 13). They are regarded as the men of scoffing 
(p. 20, 11 . 10, 1 1), and are cursed by the saints of the Most High (p. 20, 1 . 8), 
and no one is to associate with them in wealth and in work (p. 20, 1. 7). 

Neither these apostacies, however, nor the death of the Only Teacher, 
affected the fortunes of the Sect to such a degree as to be followed by its 
immediate extinction. Apparently the Sect continued its existence for a 
considerable time after these events had taken place. The Sect was constituted 
of four estates: Priests, Levites, Israelites and Proselytes (p. 14, 11 . 3, 6). 
Its government, however, was placed in the hands of the first three estates 
(p. io, 11 . 4, 5)° consisting of a body of ten men selected of the Congregation, 
in which the tribe of Levi and Aaron were represented by four and the Israelites 
by six men (p. 10, 11 . 5, 6). Only men between the age of twenty-five and 
sixty were eligible, who had to be learned in the Book of the Hagu and in the 
foundations of the Covenant (p. 10, 11 . 6 — -8). At the head of the governing 
body stood two men, the one a regular priest whilst the other bore the title 
of Censor (*Tp 3 D) an office otherwise unknown in Judaism (p. 13, 11 . 2, 5, 6; 
p. 14, 11 . 6, 8). The priest, who had to be a man between thirty and sixty, 
was expected to be learned in the Book of the Hagu, in all the laws of the 
Torah (p. 13, 1 . 2 ; p. 14, 11 . 8, 9), and a part of his office was to record in 
writing all the members of the settlement by their names in the following order : 
Priests, Levites, Israelites and Proselytes, as well as to give decisions in certain 
cases (p. 14, 1 . 6; see also p. 13, 1 . 5). More important were the functions of the 
Censor, who had to be a man between thirty and fifty, and who perhaps, as a rule, 
represented the lay element 10 , giving instruction “to the many” (p. 13, 1. 7) 
which he even imparts to the Priest (p. 13, 11 . 5 — 6). He is to be first consulted 
in the case of admission of new members wishing to join the Sect, and to examine 
them, and to give them their place in it (p. 13, 11. 11 — 12). Offences com- 
mitted by members of the Sect are reported to him, and penitents are apparently 
to apply to him for readmission (p. 9, 1 . 18 seq., and p. 15, 1 . 7 seq.). Every 
litigation and controversy is also brought before him (p. 13, 11. 14, 15) 11 , and 
together with the Judges, he administers the monthly offerings of the 
Congregation, out of which the needy and the aged are to be supported 


0 No representation from the proselytes is 
mentioned there. 

10 This is the impression one receives from p. 13, 
11 . 5, 6, where the Censor is put in contradistinction 
to the Priest. See above, p. xiii, note 6, for the 


tendency of the Sect to have the lay element 
represented in all their important offices. 

11 See p. 15, 1. 13, where the text, however, is 
defective. 


Digitized by Microsoft 1 


INTRODUCTION 


xv 


(p. 14, I. 13 seq.). \Ye must assume that a governing body consisting of ten 
Judges was only required in the ease of larger settlements. Their jurisdiction 
was very extensive, they having the power to inflict capital punishment and 
banishment on the members of the Sect, besides determining the regular civil 
cases (p. 9, 1 . 10; p. 10, 1 . 1 ; p. 12, 1 . 4), but at least a Priest and a Censor 
were considered a necessity as soon as the population counted at least ten 
members. If the Priest is not “tried,” a Levite takes his place (p. 13, 1. 3). 

In this manner the Sect organized itself in various cities (p. 12, 1 . 19) or 
camps (p. 7, 1. 6 ; p. 14, 1. 3), forming there congregations or assemblies 
(p. 11, 1 . 23 ; p. 12, 1 . 6 ; p. 13, 1 . 1 1 ; p. 14, 1 . 10). One city, however, seems 
to have been set apart as the City of the Sanctuary, the inhabitants of which 
were submitted to a rigorous observance of certain laws connected with 
Levitical purity (p. 12, 11 . 1, 2). Perhaps it was in this Sanctuary that the 
altar was placed in which regular sacrifices were brought (p. 11, 1 . 17), whilst 
the other settlements were only provided with a house of worship, which 
also had to be avoided by the unclean (p. 11, 1 . 22). 

Thus far, the history and the constitution of the Sect as suggested by 
our MS. We come now to its teachings. That the Sect accepted the Canon 
of the Old Testament needs no further proof. This is clear enough both 
from its tenets and practices, regulated after the injunctions of the Scriptures 
as understood by the Sect. In the Halacha as well as in the Hagada we have 
constant citations from and allusions to almost all the parts of the Scriptures. 
One of the most important tenets of the Sect bearing upon the Messianic 
belief is largely based on a passage from the Prophets (p. 3, 1 . 21), who are 
further cited in the polemics against its opponents (p. 4, 1. 13 seq. ; p. 5, 1. 13 ; 
p. 7, 1 . 14, etc.). For the practice, of course, it is the Pentateuch which is 
considered the main authority, cited under the term of Torah, min or min 
ni?D or minn *)£D (see, for instance, p. 5, 1 . 2 ; p. 7, 1 . 7 ; p. 1 5, 1 . 2 ; p. 16, 1 . 5 ; 
p. 20, 1 . 13), and forming the particular object of interpretation; though in 
contradistinction to the Rabbinic usage, the Sect occasionally also derives 
norms for the practice from the prophetic writings (p. 9, 11 . 9 — 10, text and 
notes). 

But besides the collection of the Books forming the Canon of the Old 
Testament, the Sect seems also to have considered as sacred certain “ external 
writings,” forming a part of the Pseudepigrapha . This can be said with 
certainty of the Book of Jubilees, which is once quoted by its full name as 
the Book of the Divisions of the Seasons (p. 16, 1. 3 D’nyn nipVntt *l£D), but to 
which reference is more frequently made without giving the name (see Index 
sub Book of Jubilees). The same may also be maintained with fair certainty of 
the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, to a portion of which, the Testament 
of Levi (p. 4, 1 . 15), at least, we have a fairly distinct reference, whilst there are 


Digitized by Microsoft f " 


xvi 


INTRODUCTION 


also other allusions to it (see Index). Besides these books still extant, though 
not exactly in the same shape as they have come down to us, the Sect must 
have also been in possession of some Psezidepigrapha now lost. This 
is evident from the reference to Yochaneh and his brother, who opposed 
Moses on the occasion of Israel’s first redemption (p. 5, 11 . 17 — 18, text and 
notes). In another place we have an allusion to “the Word which Jeremiah 
has spoken to Baruch, the son of Neriah, and Gehazi, the servant of Elisha” 
(p. 8, 11 . 20, 21), which suggests the existence of Pseudepigraphic works 
ascribed to these Biblical personages and considered authoritative by the Sect. 
Perhaps some canonical importance was also given to the Unn “l2D (p. 10, 1 . 6 , 
and p. 13, 1 . 2), the nature of which is not quite clear. It does not seem to 
be identical with the Pentateuch, as this latter is, as pointed out above, cited 
under the regular title of min (see above, p. xv). Together with the UTI *13D 
are also mentioned the Foundations of the Covenant, JV“On ’TID'I Dnn "12M 
(p. 10, 1 . 6). This might suggest that the Sect was in possession of some sort 
of a manual containing the tenets of the Sect, and perhaps also a regular set 
of rules of discipline for the initiation of novices and penitents. 

The loyalty to the Prophets on the one hand, and the recognition of 
the Book of Jubilees and other Pseudepigrapha as authoritative writings, mark 
the Sect with special features distinguishing it both from the majority of Jews 
(as represented by the Pharisees), and from the Samaritans, the most ancient 
Sect in Israel ; the former being hostile to all the books not forming a part 
of our present Canon, and the latter rejecting even the authority of the 
Prophets. 

Another point of supreme importance separating them both from Jew as 
well as Samaritan is the regulation of the calendar. The Sect looks upon 
itself as the remnant unto which God revealed “ the hidden things in which all 
Israel erred : His Holy Sabbaths and His glorious festivals, the testimony of 
His righteousness and the ways of His truth and the desires of His will which 
a man shall do and live by them” (p. 3, II. 13 — 16; cf. p. 6, 11 . 18 — 19). It 
need hardly be pointed out that this passage is a mere paraphrase of the 
passage in the Book of Jubilees: “And all the children of Israel will forget, 
and will not find the path of the years, and will forget the new moons, and 
seasons, and Sabbaths, and they will go wrong as to all the order of the 
years 12 .” The “hidden things” are, in the Book of Jubilees, disclosed to the 
Sect by a special revelation 13 , but the calendar .of this Pseudepigraphic work 
differs in the most important essentials both from that of the Pharisees and 
from that of the Samaritans (see below, p. xx). 

It is, however, the Pharisees, in particular, against whom the polemics of 

12 See Jub. 6 34 seq», to the end of the chapter. 13 See Jub. 6 3. 

See also Ch. 23 19. 


Dig 1 i/retf 


.. 




INTRODUCTION 


xvn 


the Sect are directed. They are, as it seems, dubbed as “the builder of 
the wall,” or “ fence,” referring probably to their motto, “ Make a fence to 
the Torah” (p. 4, 1 . 19; p. 8, 1 . 18, and p. 19, 1 . 31, text and notes). The 
accusations the Sect brings against their antagonists are both of a general and 
of a specific nature. They are denounced in our Text as transgressors of the 
Covenant, removing statutes and given to persecution of the righteous, and 
despising the upright whom they turn over to the sword, against whose soul 
they gather (p. 1, 11. 20, 21) 14 . They are the children of destruction, and, at 
least implicitly, they are accused of appropriating moneys belonging to the 
Sanctuary, robbing the poor, making the widows their prey, and murdering 
the orphans (p. 6, 11. 15, 16). 

The adduced reproaches are of a general nature, forming in the main 
a mere paraphrase of certain Scriptural verses applied by the Sect without 
much discrimination to their opponents (notes to p. 1, 1. 20; p. 6, 1. 16, etc.). 
There is also to be taken into account that the parallel passages as offered 
in p. 8, 11. 5 — 9, suggest that these accusations can hardly be applied in 
their entirety to the Pharisees. For we have there also the complaint that 
their antagonist “cast off restraint with an high hand to walk in the ways of 
the wicked.” But as is clear from the context these “ wicked ” can be none 


else but the Greeks 15 . The denunciation must accordingly refer to the 
Hellenistic Party, in part, at least, unless there are some words missing in 
our Text. But we have, as already indicated, accusations of a very specific 
nature, and these leave no doubt that the object of the Sect’s general abuse 
was mainly the Pharisees. The first of these accusations is polygamy, 
the opponents of the Sect being ensnared by two (wives) described in our 
text as “fornication” (p. 4, 11 . 20, 21). It is in this connection that David 
(who married eighteen wives) is ruled out of court as one ignorant of 
the contents of the Law, which was only discovered with the rise of Zadok 
(p. 5, 11. 2, 3, 5). 

This prohibition, as it must be specially pointed out, extends also to 
divorce, or rather to marrying a second wife, as iong as the first wife is alive 
though she had been divorced 10 . This is followed by another accusation that 


14 The “man of scoffing who dropped to Israel 
waters of deceitfulness (or lies) (p. i, II. 14, 15 ; 
p. 4, 1. 10, note 10 and p. 8, 1. 14) and is the cause 
of all these evils, is perhaps identical with the 
Commanding One of p. 4, 11 . 19, 20, of whom the 
same metaphor (cpDD) is used, and is, as apparent 
from the context, responsible not for new revela- 
tions but for false interpretation of the Law. Is he 
the head of the men of scoffing of p. 20, 1. 1 1, who 
are the special opponents of the New Covenant? 

15 See p. 8, 11 . 9 — ii, }V CW, unless we 
should assume that in his preference for a Scriptural 


term the writer used the word }V for Rome (which 
latter does not occur in the Bible) without any 
regard to accuracy. 

lrt See notes to p. 4, 11 . 20, 21. Cf. also p. 7, 1. 1 ; 
p. 8, 11 . 6, 7. About the prohibition of polygamy 
among the Samaritans, see Kirchheim, p. 20. Cf. 
Montgomery, p. 43. According to the evidence of 
R. Eleazarb. Tobiah in his Lckach Tob to Deut. 21 
5 (P- 35 by ed. Wilna), the Karaites also forbade 
marriage with two women (cf. Poznanski, Reime, 45, 
p. 186). About the Zadokites, see below, p. xix. 


S. (Frags. A & B) 


c 


xviii 


INTRODUCTION 


their opponents “ defile ’’ the Sanctuary, inasmuch as they do not separate 
according to the Law, and neglect (according to the interpretation of the 
Sect) certain laws concerning m 3 (p. 5, 11 . 6, 7). Then a protest follows 
against the permission to marry one’s niece, accompanied by an argument 
proving it to belong to the forbidden degrees (p. 5, 11 . 7 — 11). But, both 
the case of m 3 and not less this case of W belong to the group of laws 
forming the subject of the most heated controversies between the Samaritans 
and the Karaites on the one side, and the Pharisees (or Rabbinic Judaism) on 
the other 17 . The point at issue in the law of m 3 is not given by our 
author, but in that of nViy he agrees with the Samaritans and Karaites, and 
we may conclude that this is also the case with m3. Likewise, the laws 
concerning the Sabbath, that play such an important part with the Sect, agree 
in the main with those given in the Book of Jubilees, to which also the 
Samaritan and the Karaitic codes offer some important parallels, but they 
differ in many respects from the Pharisaic practice 18 . The few dietary laws, 
again, as well as laws relating to Levitical purity contained in this Text, show 
a strong divergence from the Pharisaic custom 19 ; and the same may be 
remarked of the la\vs bearing upon the annulling of vows which the Sect 
seems to forbid altogether 20 . 

The annals of Jewish history contain no record of a Sect agreeing in 
all points with the one depicted in the preceding pages. But sufficient 
traces and traits seem to have been left of it in the accounts of the earlier 
sects to justify us in advancing an hypothesis towards its identity. I am 
thinking of the Sect of the Zadokites to which reference is to be found in the 
early Karaitic writings. Thus, we are told by Ivirkisani in his Book of Lights 
and the High Beacons (written about 637), “Zadok was the first who exposed 
the Rabbanites and contradicted them publicly. He revealed a part of the 
truth and composed books in which he frequently denounced the Rabbanites 
and criticised them. But he adduced no proof for anything he said, merely 
saying it by way of statement, except in one thing, namely, in his prohibition 
against marrying the daughter of the brother, and the daughter of the sister. 
For he adduced as proof their being analogous to the paternal and maternal 
aunt 21 .” Now', this description of the Zadok book well fits our Text which, in 
its Hagada, is largely polemical, whilst its Halacha affords little else than mere 
statements. A real argument and refutation of the opposite opinion we have 
only, as stated by Kirkisani, in the case of prohibiting the marriage with 
one’s niece, which struck Kirkisani the more, as use is made there of the 


17 See notes to p. 5, 11 . 6 — 1 1 . defective in that place that the meaning must be 

18 See notes to p. 11, 11 . 1, 2, 9, 13—15, 16, 17. considered doubtful. 

lu See notes to p. 12, 11 . 11— 18. 21 See Kirkisani, p. 283. 

^ See notes to p. 16, 11 . 6 — 13, but the text is so 


INTRODUCTION 


XIX 


interpretary rule of Analogy or with which the Karaites operate so 

much in their marriage laws 22 . 

Of the laws peculiar to the Zadokites, only two are recorded by 
Kirkisani. The one is that they “absolutely forbade divorce, which the 
Scriptures permitted 23 .” In the chapter, again, treating of Jesus, and his 
followers, the Nazarenes, he remarks, “Jesus forbade divorce as the Zadokites 
forbade it 24 .” A similar remark he has about Obadiah of Ispahan (or Abu- 
Isa), who “forbade divorce as the Zadokites and the Nazarenes forbade it 25 .” 

Hadasi’s evidence is to the same effect, namely, that Obadiah of Ispahan 
(or Abu-Isa), like the Zadokites, forbade divorce in all cases ; which, he 
declares, is not in agreement with the word of God. In a similar manner, 
he expresses himself in another place, where he censures the religion of the 
Zadokites for the same prohibition as being against the Scriptures 20 . But as 
pointed out above, this is just the view of the Sect which regarded a second 
marriage during the lifetime of the first husband, even after divorce, as 
fornication. (See above, p. xvii.) 

The second law which Kirkisani attributes to the Zadokites and to which 
he likewise objects is in connection with the calendar. “They (the Zadokites) 
also fixed all the months at thirty days each. It is possible that they relied 
in this on the story of Noah. Again, they excluded the day of the Sabbath 
from the sum of the days of the feast of Passover, so as to make them 
seven days besides the Sabbath. In the same way also with the feast of 
Tabernacles 27 .” Hadasi practically repeats the same fact without adding 
anything fresh to it 28 . 

What is meant by the story of Noah, we learn from another place in 
Kirkisani, and from Japheth’s Commentary to Gen. I 14, and Lev. 25 5. 
According to this testimony the Zadokites or Zadok made reference to the 
account of the deluge which lasted 150 days (Gen. 8 3), beginning with the 
17th of the second month (Gen. 7 11) and ending on the 17th of the 
seventh month (Gen. 8 4), thus covering five months. This proves 
that each month counted thirty days 29 . The same argument is indicated 
in the paraphrase which the Book of Jubilees gives of Gen. 8 3, “And 
the water prevailed on the face of the earth jive months — one hundred and 


22 See p. 5, 11 . 8 — 1 1. The only other place where 
the Sect adduces something like an argument in an 
Halachic question, is p. 4, 1 . 21 and p. 5, 1 . 1, but 
in this point the Karaites differed as much from our 
Sect as the Rabbanites, as we shall see presently, 
whilst Kirkisani only speaks of the criticism of the 
Rabbanites. 

23 See Kirkisani, p. 304. 

24 See Kirkisani, p. 305. 

25 See Kirkisani, p. 31 1. See also Gratz’s Ge- 


schichte der J 11 den, vol. v. pp. 1 56, 405. 

20 See Hadasi, Alphabeta , 97, 98. Cf. Geiger’s 
Zeitschrift, 1836, p. 99. 

27 See Kirkisani, p. 304. 

28 See Alphabeta, 97, 98. Cf. Poznanski, J. Q. R. 
X. p. 265, note 1. 

29 See Kirkisani, ibid. With reference to Japheth, 
see Poznanski, Revue, vol. xi.iv. p. 177, and 
y. Q. R. x. p. 265, note 1. Cf. also Ibn Ezra to 
Gen. 8 3. 


XX 


INTRODUCTION 


fifty days 30 .” Now, the fixing of the calendar is just one of the most 
important points in which this schism showed itself. The Sect (as we have 
seen, p. xv) accepted the calendar given by the Book of Jubilees, which 
at once separated them both from Jew and Samaritan. But as we learn from 
these documents, the difference consisted chiefly in the fact that the Book 
of Jubilees accepted the solar year of twelve months, of thirty days each, and 
four intercalary days 31 . It is true that our Fragment contains no distinct 
reference either to the thirty days or to the argument from the story of Noah. 
But we must never forget that our Text consists, as explained above, only 
of extracts from a larger work (see above, p. x), and it is easily possible 
that Kirkisani was in possession of this larger work, whilst the scribe 
of our text, in his careless manner, thought it sufficient to indicate, in 
a general way, the existence of serious differences in the calendar between 
the Sect and its opponents, but omitted the details as known from the 
Book of Jubilees. It is also possible that our copyist relegated these 
details to the Halachic part, represented in our MS. only by a fragment, 
just as he did with the laws relating to the Sabbath, or to the annulling 
of vows 32 , whilst Kirkisani was in the possession of a complete copy. On 
the other hand, when a certain Karaite, Hasan ben Mashiach, in his 
controversy against R. Saadya (with regard to the calendar) attested that 
“ the writings of the Zadokites are known among people, but they contain 
nothing of what that man (Saadya) mentioned ; that there are in the writings 
of the Zadokites (various) things in which they differed from the Rabbanites 
in the Second Temple, with regard to sacrifices, etc., but there is not even 
a single letter like that which the Fayyoumite reported 33 ,” we may assume that 


30 See Jub. 5 27. 

31 See above, p. xvi. This would agree with 
Beer’s interpretation of the calendar of the Jubilees, 
in his Das Buck der Jubilaen (Leipzig, 1856). 
See Jub., the whole of ch. 6 text and notes, and 
references given there to the various explanations 
of the calendar of the author of the Book of J ubilees ; 
to which is only to be added Epstein’s discussion of 
this subject in his Eldad ka-Dani , pp. 155 — 161, 
but which is practically only a rdsumt ot his article 
in the Revue referred to by Dr Charles. Epstein’s 
suggestion that the Book of Jubilees has two 
kinds of years, an ecclesiastical year and a civil 
year, settles, it is true, many a difficulty in the text 
of the Book as it has come down to us. But it is 
not impossible that the original reading which was 
in possession of the Sect differed greatly from the 
present text. We have only to assume that in the 
case of Shabuoth, the Sect did not press the fifteenth 
of the month, taking it to mean the middle of the 
month or near it. Assuming the naUTI mnOft 


(Lev. 23 11 — 15, see Jub. 15 1, text and notes) to 
mean the whole feast of Passover, and ignoring the 
Sabbath of the Passover which the Zadokites, as 
we have seen, do not count, the sheaf-waving would 
take place on the 23rd, and the feast of Shabuoth 
would thus (allowing in accordance with Beer 
30 days for both Nissan and Iyar) fall on the 12th 
of Sivan, which agrees with the Falashic tradition. 

32 Sec, for instance, p. 6, 1 . 18, and cf. p. 10, 1 . 14 
to end of p. 1 1. Cf. also p. 7, 1. 7 and p. 16, 1 . 6 seq. 

33 See Poznanski, Revue , vol. xuv. pp. 176, 177. 
Cf. also his Karaite Uterary Opponents of Saadaya 
Gaon, pp. 15, 16. See also Hilgenfeld, Ketzer - 
geschichte , p. 160, note 271, and reference given 
there to Geiger. How confused and contradictory 
the notions about the Zadokite calendar were, is 
also clear from another passage of an earlier Karaite 
who thought that they began the month on the 1 5th 
after the New Moon, when the moon is in its full 
strength. See Poznanski, Revue y vol. XLIV. p. 172. 


INTRODUCTION 


xxt 


he had a copy something similar to ours in which the calendar differences were 
given only in a general way, while the Halachic part had more extracts 
relating to sacrifice than ours. The divergence between the testimony as to 
the nature of the Zadok books known to writers in the tenth century may thus 
be easily attributed to the difference in the texts used by the different scholars 
of that period. Our Text may thus, with good reason, be defined as containing 
extracts from a Zadok book, representing features contained in the copies of 
these authorities, but as it forms only extracts, these features are sometimes 
partly obscured ; whilst other features may be entirely eliminated. But this does 
not in any way contend against the likelihood of their being of Zadokite origin. 

This likelihood is raised, in a measure, to a degree of certainty when we 
consider the fact that it is the Zadokites from which the Sect derived its 
spiritual pedigree. It is to a Zadok to which the Sect ascribes the merit of 
having rediscovered the Law, in which act he is favourably contrasted with 
David, who was ignorant of it (p. 5, 1 . 5; cf. above, p. xiii). Who this Zadok 
was, of the many persons bearing this name in the Bible, it is impossible to say. 
At any rate, the impression is that he was a Biblical personage* 4 . But it is not 
only to the remote past to which the Sect appeals ; the Zadokites or rather 
the Sons of Zadok, according to the Sect, form the “sure house of Israel,” 
and are apparently connected with them who “held fast to the commandments 
of God,” and who were in possession of the hidden things — of the calendar 
(p. 3, 11 . 1 2 seq., 19 and 26). They are, indeed, those who remained loyal to the 
Sanctuary, the very chosen ones of Israel, called by name, that arose at the 
end of the days, and who apparently kept a Station and were connected 

with the government of the Sect (p. 4, 11 . 1 — 5; cf. also p. 2, 1 . 9, text and 
notes). A book emanating from such a sect might plausibly be regarded 
as the writings of the Zadokites, or as a Zadok book. 

The term Zadokites naturally suggests the Sadducees ; but the present 
state of knowledge of the latter’s doctrines and practices does not offer 
enough points of resemblance to justify the identification of them with our 
Sect 35 . At present it seems to me that the only ancient Sect which comes 
here into consideration is the Dosithean, for our Sect has left so many 


34 Perhaps we have here some reminiscence of 
the well-known Hagada given by Rashi and Kimchi 
in their commentary to 2 Kings 22 8. According 
to this, King Ahaz during his reign burnt the 
Torah, but they saved one copy which they hid 
between the rubble of the walls of the Temple, 
which was discovered by the High Priest Hilkiah 
during the reign of King Josiah when they were 
occupied with the repair of the walls. 

3/1 It need hardly be pointed out that there are 


both in the Hagada and in the Halacha of our 
Sect features which strikingly recall the famous 
hypothesis of Geiger regarding the Sadducees and 
the Old Halacha. But this hypothesis is still so 
undeveloped in its details, that it seems better to 
leave the subject in abeyance. It is a further and 
larger question whether we have to deal with a 
sort of counter-tradition or with an interpretation 
claiming to go back to primitive Judaism. 


fcroi 


XXII 


INTRODUCTION 


marked traces on the accounts which have come down to us about the 
Dositheans that we may conclude that they were in some way an offshoot 
from the schism which is the subject of our inquiry. The accounts of the 
Dosithean sect are, as is well known, contradictory and confusing. They 
vary in date, in the characterization of the sect, and in the description of 
its origin. There is no need to reproduce them here, or to give the 
various attempts which have been made to explain them, or to reconcile 
their various contradictions. Yet almost all these accounts, contradictory 
as they may be in other respects, offer the one or the other traces of the 
characteristics of our Sect, which suggest, if not an identity with, at least 
the descent from our Sect, which should be noted here 36 . 

Thus, the testimony of several early accounts of the Dosithean sect 
connects in some way or another the Dosithean schism with that of the 
Sadducees, or puts it at least chronologically very close to the latter. This 
feature reminds us strongly of our Sect, which derived its spiritual pedigree, as we 
have seen, from the Zadokites. Some accounts go even to the length of making 
Zadok a disciple of Dositheus, which we may take as a mere overstatement 
of the high antiquity of the Sect 37 . If Abul-Fath goes as far as to speak of 
a sect called Dustan, which arose in the time of Alexander the Great 38 , it 
may mean that the Sect claimed to have its origin in a parent sect dating from 
the Greek period preceding the Maccabean reign. This would fairly corre- 
spond with the claims of our Sect, which places the first appearance of its 
founder 390 years after the desolation of the Land by Nebuchadnezzar, which 
would bring us, as I have pointed out, to within a generation of Simon the 
Just, who flourished about 290 b.c. Such a date could easily be brought, it 
may be remarked in passing, into connection with the Zadok of the “ Aboth 
d’Rabbi Nathan ” who, according to Jewish tradition, was the disciple of 
Antigonus of Soko, the disciple of Simon the Just, and the originator of the 
Sadducean heresy 39 . 1 must, however, remark that I have my doubts about 
the integrity of the Text relating to this date. For our calculation would ne- 
cessitate the assumption that the author of our Text knew more of the Persian 
chronology than either the great majority of the Jews or the Samaritans, which 
is not likely. As pointed out in the notes to our Text, it is probable that we 
have to read (p. 1, 1. 6) instead of (490) corresponding with the 


30 For a general view of these accounts, see 
Hilgenfeld, Ketzergeschichtc , pp. 155 — 161 (also 
Index, sub Dositheus), Nult, Fragments of A 
Samaritan Fargum , pp. 47 — 52, and Montgomery, 
The Samaritans, pp. 252 — 264. See also Kraus, 
article Dositheus , in the Jewish Encyclopedia, vol. 
iv., and reference given there. 

37 See Philastcr ( Corpus Haereseologici , i., ed. 


Oehlcr), 1. 4, 5. Cf. Pseudo-Tertullian, 1., text and 
notes. See also Epiphanius, I. 79. Abul-Fath also 
places one Dosithean Sect before the Sadducees. 

38 See Abul-Fath, p. 82. Cf. Montgomery, 
p. 254. 

59 See “Sayings of the Jewish Fathers,” Taylor, 
I. 2, 3, and ibid. Excursus , in. p. in. See also 
above, p. xii. 


Digitized fry Mio osoft 


INTRODUCTION 


XXIII 


seventy weeks of years of Dan. 9 2, 24. This cycle of years, however, as we 
know, is never exact, and may be adapted by any apocalyptic writer to any event 
in history which struck him as the great crisis in the history of the nation or 
even of his Sect. Such a crisis evidently took place when the Sect escaped to 
the North and sought refuge in Damascus (p. 4, 1 . 2, and p. 7, 11 . 13, 14). But 
no such occurrence is recorded in Jewish history 40 . We are practically left 
without any definite date. But at any rate, the claims of our Sect were for 
a very high antiquity, which further receives support from the reference in 
our Text, on p. 8, 1 . 11, to the head of the Kings of Javan, though our Text, 
in its present condition, shows Roman influences 41 . It is thus not to be 
wondered at if the Dositheans, as an offshoot of our Sect, made the same 
pretensions, and even exaggerated them. 

Another point of contact between our Sect and the Dositheans is the 
calendar, both fixing thirty days for every month of the year 42 . The testimony 
of Abul-Fath is most emphatic on this point when he says, “ They (the 
Dositheans) abolished the reckonings of their astronomical tables. All their 
months consist of exactly thirty days. They abolished the true festivals and 
removed the commandments of the fasts and the afflictions 43 .” When Abul- 
Fath proceeds to say that they count the fifty days from the morrow after the 
Passover, as the Jews do, the similarity with the Jews probably consisted in 
this, that they interpreted the n 3 £ 7 l mnDD (Lev. 23 1 1, 15) to mean the Feast 
(in contradistinction to the Sadducees who took that word to mean the Sabbath) ; 
but, on the other hand, they differed from the Jews in that they understood by it 
the last day of the Feast, or the seventh day of the Passover (see above, p. xx, 
note 31). Abul-Fath further bears evidence to the strictness of the Dositheans 
in their observance of the Sabbath, a fact which is also recorded with more or 
less variation by some Fathers of the Church. This is a feature which we 
observe also in our Sect, though the details given by Abul-Fath and the Fathers 
arc not the same, and it may be that they have been misunderstood by the 
former 44 . The statement of Epiphanius is more general, when he says, “In the 


40 One can only think of the conjecture of Juyn- 
boll, in his Commetitarii in historiam gentis Santa - 
ritanae , Leyden, 1846, according to which a number 
of Samaritans might have emigrated to Damascus, 
the capital of Antiochus.Cyzicenus, their ally in the 
wars with John Hyrcan, in which they were de- 
feated, which took place somewhere between 1 28 and 
106 B.C. Kirchheim, p. 9, gives this as a fact, but 
practically there is no authority for it whatever, 
except this guess by Juynboll. 

41 For instance, the office of the Censor, occurring 
frequently in our Text. (See p. 9, I. 18, and else- 
where.) Such an office, entirely unknown to Judaism, 
could have been only borrowed from the Romans. 
Wc must also remark that these denunciations of 


the Pharisees could hardly relate to the Greek 
times. As far as historical evidence goes, the 
Pharisees could only have made their power felt at 
a much later date. 

4 - See above, p. xix, as regards our Sect. With 
regard to the Dosithean Sect, see Pseudo-Clements, 
Recognitions , It. 8. Cf. Hiigenfeld, pp. 37, 160. 
See also Abul-Fath, p. 82. 

43 See Abul-Fath, p. 82. Cf. Montgomery, 
p. 254. 

44 See Abul-Fath, ibid. Cf. our Text, p. 10, I. 22 
to p. 1 1, 1 . 17, text and notes. See also Epiphanius, 
ibid., and Origen, Dc Prittcipiis , tv. 17. In his 
statement there that they remained over the Sabbath 
in the same position until the evening, he probably 


tcroo 


xxiv 


INTRODUCTION 


same way they observe Circumcision and the Sabbath,” by which he probably 
means their rigour in observing it 45 . When he further says, that “ they have no 
intercourse with all people because they detest all mankind,” we may readily 
recognize here the law of our Sect requiring the washing of the clothes when 
they were brought by a Gentile (because of contamination), and the prohibi- 
tion of staying over the Sabbath in the vicinity of Gentiles 40 . His statement 
that the Dositheans had their own forms of government is also borne out by 
any number of passages in our text in which the government of the Sect 
forms a special feature 47 . His statement, again, that they abstain from eating 
living creatures may have some connection with the law in our Text on p. 12, 
1 . 11, which may perhaps be understood to imply that the Sect forbade honey, 
regarding it as 'fin p “DX (a limb cut off from a living animal), which would 
agree with the testimony of Abul-Fath that they forbade the eating of eggs, 
except those which were found in a slaughtered fowl 48 . More difficult is it 
to know what Epiphanius exactly meant when he said that “some of them 
abstain from a second marriage, but others never marry.” The text is not quite 
certain at this point. But may we not perceive in it, at least, an echo in some 
way of the law of the Sect prohibiting a second marriage as long as the first 
wife is still alive 49 ? 

What is more remarkable is that even in the dogmatic teachings of the 
Dosithean Sect, to which most writers attribute a somewhat gnostic aspect, 
placing the Sect practically outside the confines of Judaism, traces may be found 
strongly reminiscent of our Sect. Epiphanius is probably right when, against 
almost all the others, he maintains that the Dositheans believed in resurrec- 
tion 30 . The statement by most Fathers of the Church that the Dositheans 
denied the Prophets is probably only due to the confusion with the Samaritans. 
On the other hand, the assertion of Photius that Dositheus was particularly 
hostile to Judah, one of the twelve patriarchs, and that the Dositheans 
declared their founder to be the Messiah, is in harmony with the tendency of 
our Sect and the claims for their founder 51 . Sharastani’s account that they 
recognized in Dostan the Star, and declared him as the Only One (which is 
the Messiah), recalls also the claims of our Sect who speak of their founder 
as the Star, and apply to him the name of the Only Teacher 52 . It may 


confused it with another Sect. But see also Abul- 
Fath, 151 (Montgomery, 257), where we have some 
similar statement regarding Lhe adherents of Dusis, 
that if they travelled at all on the Sabbath, they 
did not take their hands out of their garments. 
See Wrcschner, p. 1 5. 

45 Epiphanius, ibid. 

M See Epiphanius, ibid., and see our Text, p. 11, 
11 . 3, 4, 14, 15- 

47 Epiphanius, ibid. See above, p. xv. 

48 See Epiphanius, ibid., and Abul-Fath, ibid. 


40 See Epiphanius, ibid., and note 5. Cf. above, 
p. xvii, about our Sect. 

60 See Epiphanius, ibid. See also Abul-Fath, 
15 1 (cf. Montgomery, p. 257). 

61 See Photius, Bibliotheca , code 230. Cf. also 
Hilgenfeld, p. 157, note 262, and Montgomery, 
p. 255, about Origen. Cf. above, p. xiii, about our 
Sect. 

62 SeeSharastani,pp. 258, 259. Cf. Montgomery, 
pp. 259, 260. See also Abul-Fath, p. 251, about 
the peculiar term Yechdu (TIT). 


D;*VT'ZJt7 fry Microsoft - 1 


INTRODUCTION 


XXV 


further be suggested that it is not impossible that the term the “ Standing 
One” (eorcos, or stans) to be met in patristic literature in the accounts of 
Dositheus or Simon Magus, has its origin in the Men of the Station with 
whom we meet in our Text, and who were apparently looked upon as the 
leaders of the Sect 53 . 

We may further remark here that the Falashas, whose connection 
with the Dositheans had already been suggested by Beer, show also certain 
features strongly reminiscent of our Sect 54 . To the feature of the calendar, 
reference has already been made above 55 . To this may be added the fact 
which we learn now from the Te-Ezaza Sanbat of the strong similarity of the 
Sabbath laws with those given in the Book of Jubilees, and hence also with 
those expounded in our Text 56 . The law, again, occurring in our Text, of 
submitting cloths brought by a Gentile to a special purification has a parallel 
in the testimony of several travellers, according to which the Falashas change 
their dress and take a bath after having come into contact with a Christian 
or a Mohammedan 57 . We know also that the Falasha law prohibited the 
marriage of a niece, threatening all the terrors of Hell for its transgression, 
which affords another point of similarity with the laws of our Sect 58 . 
Another point of agreement worth mentioning here is the tradition regarding 
Zadok’s rediscovery of the Law, which may, as suggested above, be responsible 
for the claim of the Falashas that it was Azariah, the son of Zadok, who 
brought with him the scroll of the Law to Abyssinia 59 . The term, again, 
mnn^n rvi, is strongly reminiscent of the Falashas’ Mesgeed , and may perhaps 
be ascribed to the influence of some Falasha scribe. But on the other hand, 
it should not be forgotten that the Falashas hope for the restoration of Zion 
and Jerusalem, and their veneration for the House of David is strongly in 
contrast with the tendency of our Sect. 

We may, then, formulate our hypothesis that our text is constituted of 
fragments forming extracts from a Zadok book, known to us chiefly from the 
writings of Kirkisani. The Sect which it represented, did not however 
pass for any length of time under the name of Zadokites, but was soon in 


53 See, for instance, Recognitions of Clement, 
Bk. i. chap. 7 2 ; Bk. II. chap. 7 and chap. 1 1. (Cf. 
Hilgenfcld, p. 37); Clementine Homilies II. chaps. 
22, 24; Homily XVIII. chap. 13; Hippolytus, 
Refutation , Bk. vi. chap. 12. Cf. our Text, p. 2, 
1. 9, text and notes. 

64 See Beer, p. 56 seq. 

65 See p. xx, note 31. 

00 See Te-EzAza Sanbat, J. Haldvy, Paris, 1902, 
pp. 142, 143, and see above, p. xviii, n. 18, the 
reference to the Sabbath laws in Jub. and in our 
text. 


57 See p. 11, 11. 3 — 4, and Journal in Abyssinia , 
by Samuel Cabot, London, 1834, pp. 174, 363. See 
also the Falashas , J. M. Flad, London, 1869, p. 55. 

58 See the Baruch of the Falashas, edited by 
J. Haldvy, in the same collection, p. 203, and cf. 
above, pp. xvii and xviii. Altogether, this whole 
collection is still in need of a thorough critical 
examination and comparison with the Pseudepi- 
graphic literature. 

50 See above, p. xxi. With regard to these claims, 
see Bruce, Travels , London, 1805, v °l- n - PP- 399? 
407. See also Flad, p. 73. 


hcrosofi { 


S. (Frags. A & B) 


d 


XXVI 


INTRODUCTION 


some way amalgamated with and perhaps also absorbed by the Dosithean 
Sect, and made more proselytes among the Samaritans than among the 
Jews, with which former sect it had many points of similarity. In the 
course of time, however, the Dosithean Sect also disappeared, and we have 
only some traces left of them in the lingering sect of the Falashas, with whom 
they probably came into close contact at an early period of their (the Falashas’) 
existence, and to whom they handed down a good many of their practices. 
The only real difficulty in the way of this hypothesis is, that according to 
our Text the Sect had its original seat in Damascus, north of Palestine, 
and it is difficult to see how they reached the Dositheans, and subsequently 

the Falashas, who had their main seats in the south of Palestine, or Egypt. 

But this could be explained by assuming special missionary efforts on the 
part of the Zadokites by sending their emissaries to Egypt, a country which was 
especially favourable to such an enterprise because of the existence of the 
Onias Temple there 60 . The severance of the Egyptian Jews from the 
Palestinian influence (though they did not entirely give up their loyalty 
to the Jerusalem Sanctuary), prepared the ground for the doctrines of 
such a Sect as the Zadokites in which all allegiance to Judah and Jerusalem 
was rejected, and in which the descendants of the House of Zadok (of 
whom indeed Onias himself was one) represented both the Priest and the 
Messiah. 

This is the only workable hypothesis I am able to offer at present. But 
whatever its destiny — for the condition of our Text precludes certainty and 
invites difference of opinion — one result which I am about to state seems to 

me to be beyond any doubt. And this is that it is among the sects severed 

from the general body of Judaism in which we have to look for the origin of 
such Pseudepigraphic works as the Book of Jubilees, the Book of Enoch, the 
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, and similar productions, — and not in 
Pharisaic Judaism. 

This fact was recognized more than half a century ago by Beer, who thus 
expressed himself with regard to the Book of Jubilees : — “ Its whole type is a 
peculiar one, and is apparently based on a sectarian foundation.” But this is 
also the characteristic which may be applied to the Book of Enoch and the 
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, which are so closely related to one 
another, all of which grew up on sectarian soil 01 . And surely this is the only 
possible view which could be formed of this class of writings by any scholar who 
has ever made a proper study of Rabbinic literature, such as the Mishna, the 
Talmud, and the “great Midrashim.” Passing from these genuine Rabbinic 

00 See FrankePs hypothesis in the Monatsschrift, 01 See Beer, p. 56. See also Epstein, p. 199, with 
v. p. 390, about the place of the rise of the Book of reference to the Book of Enoch and the Book of 
Jubilees. Jubilees. 


digitized by Microsoft 


INTRODUCTION 


xxva 


works to the Pseudepigraphic class of literature, he feels transported to 
another world — from a world of interpretation and argument to a world of 
fiction. It is not any longer the living voice of the school to which he 
is listening, but the dead imaginings of some writer impersonating the 
heroes of remote antiquity. The Rabbinic literature indeed occasionally gives 
either in the way of overstatement or bona-fide as authority for a law 
or an ordinance or a moral precept the name of a patriarch or prophet. 
Such cases, however, are exceptional, and are rooted chiefly in tradition 02 . On 
the other hand, with the writer of the Pseudepigrapha , the exception is the 
rule. He is a regular book maker, in which the masquerade feature is 
developed into a fine art, whilst, as a schismatic, he is not satisfied to form a 
link in the chain of tradition, but endeavours to appear himself as the source 
of tradition. His revelations are not in harmony with custom and usage, and 
must therefore be dated back to the Biblical or patriarchal times. This is a 
form of authorship absolutely unknown to “official Judaism” of the early 
centuries, if by “official Judaism” is understood Pharisaism which formed the 
large bulk of the nation, which identified itself with the Synagogue, which 
taught in the schools, and largely also controlled the service in the Temple. 
Parallel passages, it is true, to some of the contents of the Pseudepigrapha are 
to be found in Rabbinic literature. But these are chiefly offered by the Chapters 
of R. Eliezer and other works of a similar nature, all of them dating from a 
comparatively late period. Indeed, they are themselves a sort of Pseudepi- 
grapha of unknown origin, only that their heroes are mostly Rabbinic heroes, 
such as R. Eliezer b. Hyrcanus, R. Akiba, R. Ishmael, etc., instead of 
Biblical heroes. They differ from the old productions, both in style and in 
tendency, and they are not above the suspicion of having already made use 
both of Christian and even of Mohammedan sources® 5 . 


It was only of late years that different kinds of Pharisaism were 
discovered 04 , each of them represented by the one or the other Pseudepi- 
graphic works. We even went so far as to perceive in the Testaments of 
the Twelve Patriarchs a Midrash, portions of which were read to the suspected 


woman under the sanction of the High 

02 See, for instance, Mishna, Eduyyoth , 8. 7, 
where R. Joshua says, “ I received it from R. 
Jochanan b. Zakkai, who heard it from his master, 
and his master from his master, a law unto Moses 
from Mount Sinai,” that Elijah’s mission before the 
advent of the Messiah will only be in a certain 
given way. 

63 Even the book, nm T 1 D, attributed to the 
Prophet Elijah, docs not eliminate the features of 
interpretation and tradition. In many portions, it 
is nothing else but a running commentary in the 
regular style of the Midrash to the texts from the 


Court of Justice 65 . This hardly needs 

Bible (cf. Friedmann’s Introduction, p. 132); whilst 
the term D'DDn is frequently turning up as authority 
for certain statements. Sometimes, even the names 
of the Rabbis are given(Friedmann, ibid., pp. 59,60). 

CA See Dr Charles, Book of Jubilees , p. lix. ; 
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, p. 52. Cf. 
W. Baldensperger, Die Messianisch-Apokalypti- 
schen Hoffnungen des Judenthums, p. 42, note t. 

65 See Dr K. Kohler, J. Q. A\, v. p. 400 seq., and 
Dr Charles, Testaments , p. xvi. This is quite con- 
sistent with another theory of Dr Kohler that the 
“ Mishnaic system is the code of life of a Chasidim 


d 2 


INTRODUCTION 


xxviii 

refutation. As far, at least, as the Rabbinic literature is concerned, there is 
not the slightest indication justifying such a statement. The general impression 
we receive from the Rabbinic literature, which remains, after all, the only 
authoritative source for the teachings of the Pharisees, is that they had a 
deep aversion to all “ external writings," though not all the Rabbis were 
equally severe in their judgment upon it as, for instance, was R. Akiba. 
Hence, it is not likely that they would have indulged in the production of 
a literature towards which they all maintained a more or less hostile attitude. 
And this impression is now confirmed by our Text. For whatever 
difficulties the present unsatisfactory state of our MS. may place in the way 
of the student, and whatever doubts may prevail as to the meaning of 
this or that passage, one thing is certain, that we have to deal here with 
a Sect decidedly hostile to the bulk of the Jews as represented by the 
Pharisees. It is a Sect equipped with additional sacred books of its own, 
a calendar of its own, and a set of laws of its own, bearing upon various 
commandments of the Scriptures. It is at variance with the nation at 
large in its interpretation of the past, abusing its heroes, as in the case 
of David (p. 5, 11 . 2 — 5), and the princes of Judah (p. 4, 1 . 1 1 ; p. 7, 11 . 13, 
14 ; p. 8, 1. 3), nor does it share its hopes and aspirations for the future, 
the Messiah expected by the Sect being an offspring from Aaron. The 
Covenant of the Forefathers is an expression turning up again and again 
(p. 1, 1. 4 ; p. 4, 1. 9 ; p. 6, 1. 2 ; p. 8, 1. 18 [= p. 19, 11. 30, 3 1]) 66 , but it is 
the Sect apparently on whom both the duties and the privileges devolve at 
a later period. They who builded the Fence (thus trying to be saved by their 
own merits), failed to understand the significance of God’s love of the Fathers, 
and the import of His oath to them 67 , wherefore God hated them, whilst the 
Covenant of the Fathers belongs to the others (the members of the Sect). 
Indeed, these latter are the “sons" of the Book of Jubilees, who convict 


colony” ( J . Q. ft. v. p. 406, note 1), which need not 
be discussed here. With regard to the Testaments, 
however, I will only refer here to Bacher, Agada der 
Tannaiten , 2 ed., p. 457, where the real explanation 
of the D'DirDa is given. 1 1 is to be further 

remarked that Jer . Sotah , 16^, omits these words. 
Personally, I have little doubt that D'lirQD 

is a corruption of this term being 

also applied to the heads of the tribes and other 
men of early times. (Cf. Mechilta 48a, and Aboth (f 
ft. Nathan , 13&) Hence, his urging the DHUSD 
(Job 15 18). This view receives strong support 
from the version of the Midrash Haggadol 

no nnsc'D ^21 ton pD'A 'ton nj’xe’ O'-an 
■von 2 min' ntryoi nrtaa pita ntryo pp .~P2x 
n"'2 ab) n;> 722 n tj’x 'jc* imnta p;ox nc’uoi 


.pxn ruivj op 1 ? orb 32 by ita 122* no i"2xo 

See also Midrash Haggadol to Gen. p. 68 1. Cf. 
also Maimonides, Hilchoth Sotah , 3. 2. Perhaps 
I may remark here that Dr Charles’ statement that 
even the Talmud ( Kiddushin , 66 a) describes him 
(John Hyrcanus) as a second David (ibid., lii.), is 
incorrect. There is nothing of the kind there, the 
name David not occurring at all, and the im- 
pression is rather that the Pharisees did resent his 
wearing two crowns. 

00 It is noteworthy that reference to the nnn in 
one way or another occurs not less than 35 times 
in this short text. 

67 See p. 8, 11 . 13, 14, 15, though the text is not 
quite correct in this place. 


Dr y azeJ by Mic - 


INTRODUCTION 


XXIX 


their fathers and their elders of forsaking the Covenant 0 **, or as those 
who “have forgotten commandment and covenant, and feasts, and months 
and Sabbaths and jubilees, and all judgments 09 , ’’ — that is, the men who 
differed in the interpretation of the meaning of the Covenant and the 
rules for the “feasts and months and Sabbaths and jubilees and all 
judgments” from the principles laid down in the additional sacred book, the 
Book of Jubilees. And it is among them, again, that those books arose which 
gave authority to the New Covenant. Having ruled out their fathers 
from the Covenant, they must date back their teachings to the forefathers 
and to the patriarchs and other Biblical personages. Certainly their Book of 
Jubilees, as well as their Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs, and their 
Book of Enoch, did not agree in all particulars with the texts which have 
come down to us. The Book of Jubilees, for instance, must have contained 
more Halacha than it contains at present. Nor can all these passages, either 
in the Book of Jubilees or in the Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs favour- 
able to Judah have formed a part of the original works as known to the 
founders of the Sect. All such passages are probably a later addition by 
succeeding generations, who must have entirely recast the contents of the 
Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs. But through whatever changes and 
interpolations this class of Pseuciepigrapha may have passed — and certain of them 
may have been undertaken with the purpose of reconciling their teachings with 
those of the nation at large — their sectarian character always remained prominent, 
especially in their Halachic parts. Naturally all this class of Pseudepigrapha 
is of supreme importance for the history of Christianity, which undoubtedly 
was the consummation of all sectarian endeavour preceding it, and must have 
absorbed all the hostile elements arrayed against official Judaism ; but for this 
very reason it cannot be considered as a factor in the development of 
Pharisaic Judaism. Altogether, I have the feeling that the “higher theology” 
is a little too hasty in its reconstruction of Pharisaic Judaism, relying too much 
on a few isolated Hagadic passages which in one way or another crept into 
Rabbinic literature, and entirely ignoring the Halacha. Lagarde somewhere 
makes the remark that the treatment of the Pentateuch must never be 
approached without a thorough knowledge of the Halacha, either in questions 
bearing upon higher criticism or in those touching upon textual criticism. 
How much more is this the case with Pharisaism. The only authoritative 
source for it is and will always remain the Talmud, and the “ great Midrashim,” 
in their Hagadic and not less in their Halachic parts. 


Jub. 23 16. 


Jub. 23 19. 


Digitized by Microsoft 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


TEXT A. 


H I Now, therefore, hearken unto me, ye all who know righteousness 1 and meditate 

2 upon the work of | God 2 . For He has a controversy with all flesh 3 and He will 

3 execute judgment 4 upon all who despise Him. | For because of their treason that 

4 they forsook Him, He hid His face 6 from Israel and from His sanctuary | and 

delivered them unto the sword 0 . But when He remembered the covenant of the 

5 forefathers 7 He left a remnant | to Israel and gave them not over unto exter- 

6 mination. And at the end of the wrath 8 , three hundred | and ninety years after 

He had delivered them into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar 9 , the King of Babylon,’ 

7 He remembered them, and made bud from Israel and Aaron a root of a plant 10 

8 to inherit | His land, and to rejoice in the good of His earth. And they 

9 meditated over their sin and they knew that | they were guilty men, and they 

10 were like the blind ^groping in the way 11 | twenty years 12 . And God considered 

11 their deeds 13 , for they sought Him with a perfect heart 14 | and He raised for 
them a 15 teacher of righteousness 16 to make them walk in the way of His heart. 
And He made known | to later generations what He has wrought 17 in a ^former 

*3 generation 18 in an assembly of treacherous men 19 . | They are those who turned 
out of the way 20 . This is the time concerning which it has been written : “ As 

r 4 a backsliding heifer | so did Israel slide back 21 ,” when there arose the man of 

1 5 scoffing 22 who dropped to Israel | waters of deceitfulness 23 and caused them to 

wander in the wilderness where there is no way 24 , to bow down the loftiness of 

16 eternity 25 , to turn away | from the paths of righteousness and to remove the bound 


r\i 

1 See Isa. 517. 

2 See Job 37 14. 

3 See Hos. 4 1. See also Jer, 25 31. 

4 See Gen. 18 25 etc. 

5 Ps. IO 1 1 . 

3 See Jer. 25 31. 

7 See Lev. 26 45. 

8 Ileb. 1. 5 }*p 3 L Heb. p. 5, 1. 20, offers the 

parallel pXH pin )'pi 1. 

9 Such a number is known from Ezek. 4 5, cf. Jewish 

Commentators a. 1 ., but it is more probable Lhat we should 
read JJ 31 X instead of (490) corresponding with the 

seventy weeks of years of Dan. 9 2, 24, playing such an 
imporlant part in the Pseudepigraphie literature familiar 
to our author. See Test. Levi, 16 1, 17 2. 

10 Heb. 1 . 7 nyDDCniBL Cf. Isa. 60 21 TU. 

The following 1 V 3 X HX suggests that the words 

were taken from Isa. Accordingly, we should read 

Cf. also Zecli. 6 12, and Enoch 1 16, ^ind 
Test. Judah, 24 5. 

11 Sec Isa. 59 10 and Deut. 28 29, which parallels 

indicate that we should read Heb. 1 . 9, O'SPK’JO instead 
of the '*31 having probably come in through 

the omya. 


12 See below Heb. p. 20, 1 . 5, speaking of forty years. 
But I am not quite certain whether they refer to the same 
occurrence. 

13 See Ps. 33 15. 

14 See 1 Chron. 29 9. 

18 See Jud. 3 1 5 etc. 

18 See Hos. IO 12. 

17 See Ps. 78 6. 

18 Reading Heb. 1 . 12 ptTNT instead of JWJ X, which 
is a clerical error come in through the D^VTIX in the 
same line. It is also possible that the whole phrase is 
a mere dittography of the D'llinX JIVYim, the copyist 
also thinking of Ps. 78 6. 

19 Sec Jer. 9 1 '3 mvy. 

20 See Exod. 33 8 etc. Cf. below Heb. p. 2, 1 . 6 , and 

p. 8, 1. 4. 

21 See Hos. 4 16. 

22 See Isa. 28 14. Cf. Text B, p. 20, 1 . 11. 

23 See Micah 2 6, 11 (cf. Prov. 22 3 '13 DPI 1 ?) that is 
the false prophet. Cf. below Heb. p. 4, 11 . 19 and 20; 
and p. 8, 1. 14; and p. 20, 1. 15. 

* 4 See Ps. 107 40. 

28 T mm:. Sec Isa. 2 17. Perhaps we have in 
JYim: a corruption from niV 3 :. Cf. Gen. 49 26 “the 
everlasting hills.” 


Qicjuizca hv Microsoft t 


XXXU 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


18 

! 9 

20 


21 


II Page 2 

II 2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

io 


which the forefathers have set in their inheritance 26 . So as | to make • cleave 
unto them the curses of the covenant 27 , to deliver them to the sword that shall 
execute the vengeance | of the covenant 28 . Because that they searched in smooth 
things 29 and chose deceits, and looked forward | to the breaches 30 . And they chose 
the goods of the throat 31 and justified the wicked and condemned the just 32 | and 
^transgressed the covenant 33 and broke the statute and 34 gathered themselves together 
against the soul of the righteous 35 man. And all that walked | uprightly their soul 
abhorred 36 and they pursued them with the sword and ^rejoiced at the* war of 
the people 37 . Therefore, was kindled the wrath || of God against their congregation 38 
to make desolate their multitude, and their deeds* were unclean 39 before Him. | 
And now, hearken unto me ye all who entered into the covenant 1 and I will 
reveal to you 2 concerning the ways | of the wicked. God loves knowledge. Wisdom 
and counsel 3 He placed before Him | prudence 4 and knowledge, they minister 
to Him. Long-suffering 5 is with Him and an abundance of forgiveness | to atone for 
those who return from sin 6 , and power and might and great wrath in flames of 
fire 7 . | Therein are all the angels of destruction 8 for them who turned out of the 
way and despised the statute 9 , so that there should be no remnant | nor escaping 19 
for them. For, before the world was, God chose them not, and ere they were 

established He knew | their deeds, and He contemned the generations of blood 11 
and hid His face from the earth | to *exterminate 12 them till they were consumed 13 . 
And He knew* the years of the station 14 and the number and the explanation 
of their ends 15 , for all | the * things that be everlasting and are to happen 10 , to 


26 See Deut. 10 14. Cf. below, Heb. p. 5, 1 . 20. 

27 See Deut. 28 21, and 20 21. 

26 See Lev. 26 25. 

28 See isa. so 10 nip^>n uS nan. 

30 Heb. 11 . 1 8, 19 mvns^ ISV'1. Perhaps corruption 

of DIVID “ broke breaches” in the sense of 

licentiousness and lawlessness. Cf. Rab. Diet. s. v. 

31 Heb. 1 . 19 “INlVn. Perhaps a corruption of “I 3 iyn 
“ perishable ” “passing away.” Cf. J. Q. ft. vol. 16, 
p. 479, the expression 1311 ? cbty in a Samaritan writing 
dating from the 12th century. 

33 See Prov. 17 15. 

33 Heb. 1 . 20. Reading '3 najn for W 2 V'\. Cf. 
Joshua 7 15. 

34 See Ezek. 47 7. 35 See Ps. 04 21. 

36 Cf. Ps. 107 18. 

37 Heb. I. 21 ny 2 '~b ID'D'l. Perhaps corruption of 

'y b “They rejoiced at the war.” Another alter* 

native is IJVD '1 meaning, “they goaded the people into 
war.” 

30 See Ps. 106 40. 341 See Ezek. 36 17. 

IT II 

1 Heb. i. 2 nna \xa for maa 'a. cf. jcr. 34 10 
and below, Heb. p. 12, 1. 10; p. 15, 1 . 5 etc. By this 
probably is meant the “New Covenant.” Cf. below, 
lleb. p. 6, I. J9. 

2 lleb. 1. 2 C33TX Moie pro!>able is that 

□ 3 MR is a corruption of D 3 U'V, as below, 1. 14. See 
1 Sam. 20 2 and 22 8. 


3 Heb. 1. 3 mnm. 

4 Heb. 1 . 4 rmy. Cf. Beth Hammidrash (Jellinek) 
v. 174 about the Gates of HOny which God opens for 
Melatron. See also Prov. 8 12. 

5 Exod. 34 6 etc. 

6 See Isa. SO 20. 

7 Heb. 1 . 5 HDQ. Perhaps we should read D EH 
“heat” as suggested by the context “flames of fire.” 
'anb Heb. ibid, is probably a corruption of nianS. 
Cf. Ps. 20 7. 

8 Heb. 1. 6 San. The term nbnn 'D frequently in 
Rab. literature. Cf. Rab. Diet. s. P 3 H and s. “|N^D. 

9 See Micah 3 9. 

10 See Ez. 0 14. 

11 Heb. I. 8 D 3 D. Perhaps it is a corruption of 
D*lpD “of yore” or the former generations. 

12 Assuming that the in the Heb. text which gives 
no sense is a remainder of DTD 3 *i"lP. 

13 See Deut. 2 15, Jer. 24 10. 

14 Heb. e.g. See below, lleb. p. 4, I. 5- 

Meaning obscure. Heb. p. 20, 1 . 5, would imply that 
station means as much as the position of the member in 
the inner council of the Sect, and their activity as governors 
or heads among the men of the “ perfection of holiness.” 

H lleb. 1 . 9 DiTVp PV1D1. Heb. p. 4, 1 . 5, however, 
suggests the emendation DlVmV “ 0 DD 1 , “the number 
of their sufferings.” See, however, Heb. p. 16, 1 . 2. 

16 Heb. 1 . 10 JV'nM Meaning obscure. 

I take the 'in as a participle of HIPI. Cf. Jastrow and 


Dig ‘nzcct by Microsoft " 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


XXXltl 


1 1 


I 2 

r 3 


H HI 14 

15 

16 


>7 

18 


*9 

20 

2 1 


JV || Page 3 

2 

3 

4 

5 


that which will come to their ends 17 , for all the years of eternity. | And in all of 
them He raised for Himself men called by name 18 , in order to leave a remnant 
to the earth 19 and to fill | the face of the world with their children 20 . And through 
His Anointed 21 He made them know His Holy Spirit, and he | is true 22 , and the 
* explanation of their names 23 , and them He hated He made go astray. | 

Now, therefore, children, hearken unto me 1 and I will open your eyes to sec 
and to meditate over the deeds | of God, and to choose what He desireth and 

despise what He hateth. To walk uprightly 2 | in all His ways and not to seek 

after *the thoughts of the imagination 3 guilt and after the *eyes of fornication 4 . 
For many | were led astray by them, and mighty men of valour stumbled by them 
from beforetime and hitherto. Because they walked in the stubbornness | of their 
heart 5 fell the * Watchers 6 of the heaven. By them 7 were they caught because they 
kept not the commandment of God. | And their children whose height was like 
the height of the cedars 8 and whose bodies were like mountains* likewise fell 9 . | 
All flesh that was on dry land *also perished 10 , and they were as though they had not 
been 11 . Because they did their | own will and kept not the commandment of their 
Maker until His wrath was kindled against them 12 . || 

By it* went astray the sons of Noah and * their families 1 , and because 

of it they were rooted out 2 . | Abraham did not walk in it and he * became 

friend 3 because he kept the commandment of God and chose not | the will of his 
own spirit. And he delivered (it) to Isaac and to Jacob 4 , and they observed (it) 5 
and were recorded as friends | of God G and men of the covenant for ever 7 . By 
them the sons of Jacob went astray and they were punished* according 8 to | their 


Kohut s, v. For JV'TO read TOHM. Cf. below, p. 13, 
1 . 8 Iieb. Cf. also Ecclus. Heb. 4 2 19. 

17 Heb. ibid. N 13 ' TO iy. I hardly need say that 
these translations are only tentative. 

18 Cf. Num. 16 2 W ['CON iytt] 'Nip in accordance 
with which our text is perhaps to be emended. See 
also below, Iieb. p. 4, 1. 4. 

19 See Ezek. 14 21. 

30 See Isa. 27 6. 

21 Heb. 1 . 20 IJViTO. See also Heb. p. 12, I. 23; 
p. 14, 1. 19; p. 19, 1. 10; p. 20, 1. 1. 

22 Heb. lines 12, 13 TON Nhll, referring probably to 
the nn in opposition to the Tpfc? HI") of Belial. Cf. 
Jub. 1 20, 21. 

28 Heb. 1 . 13 DiTIlW The parallel, 

however, offered by Heb. p. 4, 11. 4, 5, makes it clear that 
the here is a dittography; whilst instead of CT 1 B 31 , 
we should read CT 1 B 1 . Meaning not quite clear to me. 

III 

1 See Prov. 8 32. 

2 See Ps. lOl 6. 

8 Iieb. 1 . 16 See Gen. 6 5 "HP 

mTJTID. Perhaps IV' is here as much as inn TP. 

4 Heb. ibid. corruption of 'Py. Cf. Num. 16 
39. Cf. Si/re 35 s TOT W DTO'tf '"lJINl. See also 
Test. Issachar, 7 2 ; 2 Peter 2 14. 

6 Cf. Jer. 13 10. 

6 Heb. 1 . 18 'Ty corruption of '"Vy the “Watchers.” 
Cf. Enoch 1 5; 7 2; Jub. 4 16; Test. Reuben, 6 6; 
and Test. Naphtali, 3 3, 5, text and notes. 

S. ( Frags. A & B) 


7 Heb. 1 . 18 TO which the scribe often wrote for D 3 . 

8 See Amos 2 9. 

» Heb. 1 . 19 ibsj '3 which is probably a corruption 
of '3 p DJ . See also the following note. 

10 Reading in the Hebrew 031113 DM "C’R 13*3 ^3 
1 »J 1)3 DJ). Cf. Gen. 7 ** and 23. Cf. also Jub. 4 i + . 

11 See Obad. 15, Job lO 19. 

12 Sec Isa. 6 23, etc. 

If IV 

1 Iieb. 1 . I Dnt'ninBtTO) probably suggested by Gen. 
10 32 ru ninDITD. But the reading is doubtful, 
the MS. being, lorn and the letters in brackets missing. 
The sin to which he refers is perhaps the eating of blood 
(cf. Jub. 6 18 and below, 1 . 6), assuming that some 
sentence is missing in which reference to this sin was 
made. It is also possible that the »“Q at the beginning of 
this paragraph (p. 3, 1. 1 “ in it”) is a corruption of D 13 . 
Of course, 'yn, the second word in this line is a mere 
clerical error for Wl. 

2 Heb. ibid. DH H 3 . Cf. Lev. 7 27; 

Jub. 6 12 ; that is, liable to the punishment of PTO. 

3 “Became friend” Heb. 1 . 2 3 HHN TOiyT which 
reading however is very doubtful as indicated by the 
brackets. Cf. Jub. 19 9, and N.T. James 2 23. 

4 See Jub. 21 18 where Abraham commands Isaac to 
refrain from eating blood. See also Jub. 6 19. 

5 Heb. VIEC’M omitting nmX (HlSOn). Cf. Jub. 
6 19, text and notes “ a b omit ‘it’.” 

8 See Jub. 19 9 and 30 21, cf. Singer, p. 151. 

7 See Gen. 14 13. 

8 Reading Heb. 1. 4 instead of 

€ 


' ' u-uz cu t ( A icrosof: " 


XXX IV 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


6 

7 


8 

9 

10 
1 1 


12 

H V 13 
'4 


«5 

16 


17 


18 


1 9 

20 

21 

II Page 4 

2 


error. And their children in Egypt walked in the stubbornness of their heart to 
take counsel against | the commandments of God and every man doing* that which 
was right in his own 9 eyes and they ate blood 10 . Therefore He exterminated | their 
males in the desert* when He spake* to them in the desert in Kadesh, Go up 
and possess* the *land u . *And they provoked* His spirit 12 , and hearkened not | 
unto the voice of their Maker 13 , the commandments of their teachers 14 , and murmured 
in their tents 15 . Therefore the wrath of God was kindled | against their congregation 16 , 
and their children perished by it, and their kings were exterminated by it, and their 
mighty men perished by it | and their land *was made desolate * 17 by* it By it 
were guilty ls the first that entered into the covenant, and they were delivered | unto 
the sword 19 . Because they forsook the covenant of God and chose their* own will 
and sought after the stubbornness | of their heart 20 , every man doing according to 
his pleasure 21 . 

But with them that held fast to 1 the commandments of God, | who were left among 
them, God confirmed His covenant with Israel for ever, revealing | unto them the 
hidden things in which all Israel erred : His holy Sabbaths and His glorious 
festivals, | the testimony of His righteousness and the ways of His truth and the 
desires of His will which a man shall do [ and live by them 2 . He opened before 
them 8 and they digged a well of many waters, | and he that despises them shall 
not live 4 . But they * wallowed 5 in the transgression of man 6 and in the ways of 
the unclean woman. | And they said that it belongs to us 7 . But God in the 
*abundance 8 of His wonder made atonement for their sins 9 and forgave their trans- 
gression. | And He built them a sure house in Israel 10 , the like of which never arose 
beforetime and | hitherto. They who hold fast to Him are for the life of eternity, 
and all glory of man is for them; as | God confirmed it to them through Ezekiel, 
the prophet, saying: “The priests and the Levites and the sons || of Zadok that 
kept the charge of His sanctuary when the children of Israel went astray | from 
*them they shall bring near unto me fat and blood 11 .” 


9 See Jud. 17 6. 

10 See Jub. 4 6. 

11 The Ileb. text (II. 6 and 7 HR ICHl—maM) is very 

corrupt. But the parallel passages in Num. 14 29, 43, 
Deut. 1 40 — 46, 9 23, 24 and Ps. 106 33 suggest the 
following correction OH 1 ? "On 0113 1 rTO'l 

[p,xn nNirj-n tnp naion after which our trails- 
lation was made. 

12 Heb. 1 . 7 Onn etc. which gives no sense, but 

the references given in the former note suggest V1DM 
im"l nN. It is also possible that the missing words are 
Dnn nron “and chose the will of their own 

spirit.” Cf. above, 11 . 2 and 3. 

13 See Isa. 22 11. 

14 Ileb. 1 . 8DHHP. Cf. below, Heb. p. 6, I. 11, and 
p. 20, I. 14. 

15 Ileb. I. 8 Um. See Ps. 106 25. 

18 See Ps. 106 40. Cf. at>ove, p. 1, I. 21, and below, 
Ileb. p. 8, I. 13. 

17 Reading Ilebtew 1 . 10 TO V} for nQ&t?. Cf. Jer. 
12 11, and Lev. 26 33. 

18 Heb. 1 . 12 lan. See Rah. I)icL. s. v. 3 in. 

19 See above, Ileb. p. 1, 1. 17. 

20 See above, Ileb. p. 2, I. 16. 


21 See Esther 1 8. 

V 

1 Heb. I. 12 msoa D^moai. Cf. Isa. 56 
4, seq. Cf. below, Heb. p. 20, 1 . 27. See also Test. 
Naphtali, 3 1. 

2 See Lev. 18 5. The whole passage evidently refers’ 
to calendar differences. Cf. Jub. 11456 34,37 and 23 19. 
It is however not clear what is meant by the “Holy 
Sabbaths” (K'Hp mMC»). Cf. below, Heb. p. 6, 1 . 18 
and p. 20, II. 30 and 31. Perhaps it refers to certain laws 
regarding the observance of the Sabbath. Cf. Singer, 
p p. 1 91 and 198. See Introduction, pp. xvi and xviii. 

3 Heb. 1 . 16 Drp:£& 'D. Perhaps corruption of 
OrPJ'J? '3 “ He opened their eyes.” Cf. 2 Kings 6 20 etc. 

4 More fully is the simile of the well developed 
below. Heb. p. 6, 1 . 2, seq. 

4 Heb. 1 . 17 Munn. Cf. Heb. below, p. 8, 1 . 5. 

* Ileb. ibid. y3’23. Prov. 29 6 '3. 

7 Perhaps allusion to ICzek. 11 15, and 33 24. 

6 Heb. 1. 17 'H3 corruption of 31“Q. 

9 Ileb. ibid. DMV ny 3 “123 which suggests Diy 3 133 . 
Cf. Lev. 16 6 etc. See also below, Heb. p. 4, 1 . 10. 

lf1 Cf. 1 Snm. 2 33 etc. 

11 Ezek. 44 15 n*33‘ Tj’s pm* '12 Q'lSn D'ansm 


Digitized P r Microsoft'#' 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


XXXV 


H VI 3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 

10 

1 1 
12 
13 
*4 

15-16 

17 


The priests are the captivity 1 of Israel | who have gone forth out of the land 
of Judah and they who have joined them 2 . And the sons of Zadok are the chosen f 
of Israel called by names 3 that arose at the end of the days 4 . Behold the explanation | 
of their names according to their generations, the end of their station and the number 
of their sufferings and the years | of their sojourns 5 and the explanation of their 
deeds. The holy they alter which God made atonement | for them 0 . And they 
justified the righteous and condemned the wicked 7 . And all they who come after 
them | to do according to the interpretation of the Law in which the forefathers were 
* instructed 8 until the ^completing 9 | of the end of these years. In accordance with 
the covenant which God has confirmed to the forefathers to make atonement j for 
their sins, so shall God make atonement for them 10 . And after the completing of the 
end in accordance with the number of these years | *one shall not join the house of 
Judah 11 , but every man shall stand up against his | net 12 . The wall is built, the decree 
is far removed 13 . And during all these years there will be | Belial 14 let loose against Israel 
as God hath spoken through Isaiah, the prophet, the son | of Amoz, saying: Fear 
and the net and the snare are upon thee, O inhabitant of the land 15 Its explanation 
is 10 1 : three nets of Belial concerning which Levi the son of Jacob hath spoken 17 | by* 
which he ensnared Israel 18 and ^directed their faces to the three kinds | of righteousness. 


imp* non 'byo *?xx” m rnyra wpo metro nx 
.'n ms ex: mi nbn *b anprA mdS nom vmA 'bx 

Our He b. 1 . 21 and p. 4, II. i, 2 text reproduced by the 
translation reads 11DJT "C*X pl"Uf "OSl O'lbni D'jnan 

'V icw Drvbuo bx-if ' ’33 mjjna icnpo moro nx 

Dll The differences are striking and some of 

these may be ascribed to the carelessness of the scribe, 
but it is not impossible that the differences in the first 
three words were made intentionally to indicate that his 
priests and Levites were not identical with the sons of 
Zadok. This is at least the impression one receives from 
the comment given in the lines that follow. 

•J VI 

1 Heb. 1 . 2 Cf. Heb. p. 6, 1 . 5; p. 8 , 1 . 16 

(text B, 1 . 29) which word I read “captivity.” The 
word, however, can also be read * 3 ^ “repentants.” Cf. 
p. 19, 11 . 15, 16. But p. 6, 1 . 5, connecting the with 
the immigration from the land of Judah, speaks in favour 
of “ captivity.” 

2 Ileb. 1. 3 nmy D'lP:m representing the D'lb of 
Ezekiel. 

8 See above, Heb. p. 2, 1 . n. 

4 Cf. Gen. 49 1, I)an. IO 14 etc. 

5 Heb. 1 . 6 DTlUnn. It may also mean wanderings. 
Cf. above, Heb. p. 2, 11 . 9 — 12. As above reference is 
contained here to the history of the sect, the names of its 
leaders, the sufferings during their wanderings before they 
settled and their various activities. But unfortunately all 
these details were omitted by the scribe. 

6 Heb. 11 . 9, 10 ..D' 3 C CHipn of which I 

give a literal translation, hut it renders no sense. The 
text is evidently corrupt and before the EHlpil some 
words are evidently missing. It is, however, possible, 
that we should emend D':C CHIpH into D* 311 ?'X"in. Cf. 
below, 11. 9, 10, though even with this emendation the 
sense is not quite clear. Another possibility is that the 


D'Jlfc? BHIpn is a corruption of DHD1C* tnpDH, 11 they 
keep the charge of the sanctuary', ” which is one of the 
functions of the sons of Zadok. 

7 See above, Ileb. p. 1, 1. 19. 

3 Heb. nmnn used by this writer in the sense of 
instruction. Cf. Heb. p. 7, 1 . 5. See also Heb. Diet. 
See, however, p. 20, 1 . 31, which probably means “were 
chastised.” 

9 Heb. 1 . 8 O'ta corruption of cf. below, 1. 10. 

10 The meaning of these last two sentences is entirely 
obscure. All we can see is that he contrasts his congre- 
gation with its priests, its Levites and the sons of Zadok 
with the wicked men who followed the 

(Heb. p. i, 1. i 4 ) who are further accused of having 
justified the wicked and condemned the righteous (Heb. 
p. 1, 1. 19). They are not entirely free from sin but 
they arc redeemed by the fact that they follow the 
explanation of the Law as was understood by the 
forefathers (0WN“1), that is iVoah and the Patriarchs 
(in the Book of Jubilees). Hence they obtain pardon, 
as their forefathers did. 

11 Heb. i 11 min* nu by i\y nan vnb j\\\ Cf. 

Isa. 14 1. 

13 del). mVD C”X HOI' 1 ? DX '3 (ll. io, n) that 
is to watch over the net lest he be caught. 

13 See paraphrase of Micah 7 1 1 but the application is 
not clear to me. 

14 Seejub. 1 20. 

15 Isa. 24 17. 

1B Reading Heb. 1 . 14. Ileb. nrS, meining as much 
as CT2. Cf. Heb. and Rab. Dictionaries, s. "CD. 

17 Hel). 1 . 15 apr p '1 b 1 DX en'Pv TJ’X . Perhaps 
some words are missing here. In any case we have here 
a distinct reference to the Testament of Levi, see below 
note 18. 

13 Ileb. ihid. I. 16 ^ 02*3 DH 3 U*Sn XVI TN taking 
the Xin to refer to TVvE. Cf. Jnb. 1 20. It is however 


e 2 


Digitized by Microsoft o 


XXXVI 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


18 


*9 

H VII 20 
21 


II Page 5 
2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 


The first is fornication, the second is * wealth 10 , the third | is the * pollution of the 
sanctuary 20 . He that fleeth from this will be ensnared by that, and he that escapeth 
the one will be ensnared | by the other 21 . They that builded the * wall 22 who walked 
after the * commanding one 23 . 

The commanding one is he who prophesies* | concerning which he said, “ For 
a surety they do drop words 1 .” They are ensnared by two : by fornication 2 , taking | two 
wives during their lifetimes 3 , *but the foundation of the creation 4 is, “Male and female 
created He them 5 .” || And they who came into the Ark, “Two and two went into the 
Ark G .” As to the prince 7 it is written, | “He shall not multiply wives unto himself 8 
*But David read not in the Book of the Law that was sealed, which | was in the Ark. 
For it was not opened in Israel from the day of the Death of Elcazar | and Joshua 9 , and 
the Elders who worshipped Ashtareth 10 . And it was hidden | and was *not discovered 11 
until Zadok arose. But they * concealed 12 the deeds of David save only the blood 
of Uriah 13 | and God abandoned them to him. They also contaminate the sanctuary 
as* they | separate not 14 according to the Law and lie with her who sees the blood 
of her issue 15 . They take | unto them a wife 16 the daughter of their brother and the 


possible that the author was thinking of Ezek. 14 4, 5 

n'n nx trsn uj D'C' iaiy Visooi 

To place before man the “stumbling- 
blocks of his iniquities” is thus a means of leading him 
back to righteousness. XI H would thus refer to Levi and 
would mean by which he (Levi) “took” Israel (in 
their hearts). 

19 Reading Ileb. I. 17 Jin instead of J'n. Cf. Heb. 
p. 6, 1 . 15 and p. 8, 1 . 5. See Jub. 23 2T. 

*> Heb. p. 4 , 1 . 10. Reading Heb. 1 . 18 W 1 nXDD 
instead of XDD. Some sort of a parallel may be found to 
this passage in Test. Levi, 14 5 — 8, cf. ibid. 9 9 (see 
also p. 229) and Jub. 30 15, though the parallel is 
neither complete nor distinct enough. But it is possible 
that our author had a more complete text. See also 
Jub. 7 . 21 text and notes with reference regarding the 
“three things” “owing” to which “the deluge came upon 
the earth”: fornication, uncleanness (=nXDUJ?) and 
iniquity (^>TJ or DOn?). 

21 See Isa. 24 18, andjer. 48 44. 

22 Heb. I. 19 pnn before which expression, some 
words must be missing. )*1H is a corruption pn cf. Ezek. 
13 10. The writer also probably thought of Lamen. 2 14. 
We have here as well as below, p. 8, I. 12, an attack on 
Pharisees whom he derides as fence or wall builders 
to protect the law whilst in truth they are the worst 
offenders. Possibly this denunciation is in some way 
connected with the accusation of Test. Levi, 14 4, 
“teaching commandments contrary to the will of God.” 

58 See IIos. 5 11. 1VH to jID'D' is only a disturbing 
parenthesis. 

% VII 

1 See Micah 6 6 , 11. Cf. above, p. 1, I. 14 ; below, 
p. 8, 1. 13; and p. 19, 1. 25. 

2 Heb. 1 . 20 ':i nun D'JTJU. The D'nnn is an 
anticipation of D'fcU 'Dt? in the following line which the 
author considered as filJt. It is followed in p. 5 (I. 6) by 


an explanation of HXE1D whilst the explanation of }1H is 
apparently missing, being given only in general terms on 
p. 6, 1. 15, seq. 

3 Ileb. 1 . 21 errm. The argument is evidently 
not only directed against polygamy, but also against 
divorce which certain Jewish sects forbade. Bachrach, in 
his Voreach Lemoadim , p. 49 0, perceives in the wording 
of Jub. 3 7 (see text and notes about the versions), also 
a prohibition against divorce, which, however, is question- 
able. See also Introduction, pp. xvii and xix. 

* Heb. 1 . 21 nxnnn which term for creation is rather 
late. 

6 Gen. l 27, cf. Matt. 21 3. Aboth d’R. Nathan 
p. 5 a uses the same argument of Adam against polygamy 
but does not give the verse. 

6 See Gen. 7 9. 

7 Heb. 1 . 1 

8 Deut. 17 20. 

9 Heb. I. 4 JftyiM JTJnrPI which is a mere dittography. 

10 See Jud. 2 13. 

11 Reading Heb. II. 4, 5 X^I jDD‘1 instead of 

pDD'1. Another possibility is that is a cor- 
ruption of i"6jD and is here = “lDD. To which Zadok 
reference is made here is difficult to say. It must in any 
case be a Biblical personage. See Introduction, p. xxi. 

12 lieb. I. 5 lSy’l, which I take to be a corruption of 
iD'bjn. 

13 See 1 Kings 15 5, of which our author evidently 
does not approve. 

14 Reading 1 . 7 for 

15 Ileb. ibid. 'J1 m DX HNWI which is the regular 
Rabbinic term for menstruation. For differences between 
Rabbinites and Samaritans and the Karaites, see 
Vreschner, Die Samaritanische Tradition , p. 30 seq. and 
the references given there to Geiger and others. 

16 Reading Ileb. 1 . 8 H^’X instead of t?'X. 


Oirjitizeci by Microsoft ,v 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


XXXVlt 


9 

IO 


11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 


n 

18 

1 9 

VIII 20 

2 I 

Page 6 


daughter of their sisters 17 . But Moses said, “Thou shalt not | approach the sister of thy 
mother: she is thy mother's near kin 18 ,” and the law of incest 10 for males | is written, 
and like them 20 arc the females; and if the daughter of the brother uncovers the 
nakedness of the brother | of her father* he 21 is a near kin. They also contaminated 
their holy spirit 22 and with a tongue | of reproaches they opened the mouth against 
the statutes of the covenant of God, saying, They are not proper. But abomination | 
they speak concerning them. They all kindled 23 a fire and set in flames the sparks 24 . 
The weaving | of spiders are their weavings and the eggs of adders are their eggs 25 . 
He who comes near them | shall not be innocent. Like *a thing accursed shall his 
house be guilty 26 * unless he was* forced 27 . Beforetimes 28 God *observed | their deeds 
and His wrath was kindled because of their devices. For it is a people of no under- 
standing 29 . | They are a nation void of counsel 30 , because there is no understanding in 
them 31 . For beforetimes rose 32 | Moses and Aaron through the prince of the Urim 33 , 
*when 34 Belial raised Yochaneh and | his brother 35 in his device when Israel was 
delivered for the first time 30 . | 

And at the end of the destruction of the land there arose those who removed the 
bound 1 and led astray Israel. | And the land became desolate because they have spoken 
rebellion 2 against the commandments of God through Moses and also || against His 
holy Anointed one 3 , and they prophesied a lie to turn away Israel from after | God. 


17 Reading Heb. ibid. DlTniriR for ininR. It is also 
possible that we ought to read VI 1 R for DiTHR in which 
case it would correspond with ininR. 

18 Heb. u. 8, 9 x'n -px ixc’ mpn x 1 ? -px ninx ^x 

but the nearest parallel Lev. 18 13 reads DUIR JIIIT 

x’n -]dx ixc? o rtan x? -px. 

19 Heb. 1 . 10 mnyn which is a Rabhinic term. Of. 
Rab. Diet. s.v. 

20 Heb. 1 . 10 DH 21 as much as DH 1 D 21 . 

21 Reading Heb. 1 . 11 R1H1 for RM1. The argument 
turns up often in Karaitic books if he must not marry his 
aunt she must not marry her uncle. Cf. Kircheim p. 28 
with reference to the Samaritans. See also Hadasi, 
Eshkol H akkofer, p. 117 c, and Likkute Kadmonioth , ed. 
Harkavy, pp. 97 and 100. See also Poznanski, Kaufman 
Gedenkbuch y 172, seq. 

22 Heb. 1 . II D nwp nn. See below, p. 7, 1 . 7. 
See Dr Gaster’s edition of the Will of Naphtali, P.S.B.A., 

1894, p. 1 17, 0'r6x nn nx fpo' x 1 ? -ex mx ntrxi 

nt^npn, Wertheimer, nie’TID 'n 3 n. p. 14, nCW 

mpni? D’n^x nn xoo' xta mx. 

23 Heb. 1 . 13 imp which I corrected after Isa. 50 n, 

'mp. 

24 Heb. ibid. mp'T nynDI. Isa.ibid. mpn niXDI. 

25 See Isa. 584, 5. 

26 Heb. 1 . 15 1 JT 2 VD which I take as a 

corruption of '2 DlfD. Possibly T!2 = D'Tin2 (see 
Jer. 17 6) whilst D 2 ’R' = Dw-'J ** to be desolate” (see 
Hos. 14 1). See also below, 1 . 21. Job 27 18 suggests 

'2 C?V2, but none of these explanations is satis- 
factory. 

27 That is to say, that in case of compulsion, he is 
exempt from punishment. Heb. ibid. }‘r6,3 DR '2. I 


hardly need repeat here that the explanation of such 
corrupt texts is merely tentative. 

28 The Heb. equivalent Ibid. D^DP' 73 ^ ( 1 . 17 D'DD^D) 
is preceded by the words DR '2 which I omitted as a 
mere dittography. 

29 See Isa. 27 11. 80 Deut. 32 28. 

81 See Deut. ibid. rm 2 H DH2 ]\X1. 

82 Heb. I. 17 TDV . Possibly it is a corruption of 
“ helped.” The connection of the following lines 

with the preceding is not clear to me. 

88 Heb. 1 . 18 DH 1 RH 22 *. Perhaps it is a corruption 
of D^DH yy “the prince of the Presence” who helped 
Moses against the devices of Belial (or Mastema), cf. 
Jub. 48 2 and 9. Cf. especially ibid. v. 4, “And I 
delivered thee out of his (Mastema’s) hand ” ; the deliverer, 
apparently, is the angel of the Presence, who dictates to 
Moses the contents of the Book of Jubilees. See Jub. 1 
27; 2 1. 

84 Heb. ibid. Dp'l which I took to mean here as 
much as D'pH TJ‘R 2 . 

83 The brother is Mamre. We have evidently here a 
reference to the well-known Jannes and Jambiies legend. 
See the literature in SchUrer, Gesehichte des Jiidischm 
VolktSy III., 1898, pp. 292 — 294. Cf. also Realmcyklopddie 

fiir protestantische Thcologic ttnd K ire he, 3rd edition, 
Vol. viii., p. 587. 

86 Heb. 1 . 29 J1R. Perhaps corruption of HV. See 
N.T. 2 Tim. 3 8. 

Will 

1 Cf. Heb. above, p. 1, 1 . 16. See also ibid. 1 . 5, 
text and notes. 

2 See Deut. 13 6. See also below, Heb. p. 12, 1 . 3. 

3 Heb. 1 . 1 DHIpH 1 PWD 2 as much as Cmpn ' 2 . 
Cf. above, 1 1 eh. p. 2, 1. 12. 


Vieirtited by Microsoft (P* 


xxxviii FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 

But God remembered the covenant with the forefathers 4 . And He took from Aaron* 

3 men of understanding and from Israel | wise men and made them* understand 6 , and 

4 they digged the well 6 . “The princes digged the well; they digged it, | the nobles of 
the people, by the lawgiver 7 .” The well is the Law, and they who digged it are the | 

5 captivity 8 of Israel who have gone forth out of the land of Judah 9 and sojourned in the 

6 land of Damascus 10 , | all of whom God called princes. For they sought Him and their 

7 bough was not turned back | in the mouth of one 11 . And the Lawgiver is he who 

8 interprets the Law concerning whom | Isaiah said,“ He bringeth forth an instrument for 

9 his work 12 .” And the nobles of the people are they | who came to dig the well by the 

jo precepts 13 which the Lawgiver ordained | to walk in *them 14 for all end of the wicked- 

!i ness 15 . And they shall reach * nothing beside them 16 until there will arise 17 | the teacher 

of righteousness 18 in the end of the days. And all they who were brought 19 into 

12 the ^covenant | they shall not enter into the Sanctuary to kindle His altar, and 

13 be shutting | the door, concerning whom God said, “Who is there among you who 

14 would shut the doors 20 , neither do you kindle my altar | for naught 21 .” If 22 they 
will not observe to do 23 according to the interpretation of the Law, until the end 

13 of the wickedness 24 , and to separate | from the children of destruction 25 , and to 
separate from the wealth of wickedness which is contaminated by a vow and 

16 curse 26 , | and *from 27 the wealth of the sanctuary, and rob the poor of his people 

17 (so that) widows be their prey, | and they murder the fatherless and 23 to distinguish 

18 between clean and unclean 29 and to make known between | the holy and the 

profane, and to observe the Sabbath according to its interpretation and the feasts | 

4 See Lev. 26 45. See also above, p. 1, 1 . 4, and 
below, p. 8, 1. 17. 

5 Heb. 1 . 3 corruption of The word 

may also be read DjT2w”l “ he made them take an oath.” 

See above, Heb. p. 3, 1 . 16. 

7 Heb. 1 . 4 PpiriDn. Cf. Num. 21 18, or by the 
direction of the Lawgiver. 

8 Heb. 1 . 5 '2ttL See above, Heb. p. 4, I. 2, text 
and notes. 

9 Cf. above, Heb. p. 4, 11 . 2, 3. 

10 See below, Heb. 1 . 19. 

" Heb. 11. 6, 7 iriN 'D 3 arms rDD’in of 
which the last twelve words are a literal translation but 
give no sense. Perhaps we should read 'D m 2 tyn 
nilN H22. Cf. Ezek. 31 12. The meaning would be 
that their searching in or interpreting of the Law had not 
the effect of breaking the bough by a single fruit, that is 
did not result in any heresy. Cf. the Rabbinic phrase 
mrt:n fXp and see Rab. Diet. s. nrD: and s. p?p. 

12 Isa. 64 1 6. 

13 Heb. 1 . 9 mppinon = D'piri. More probable is 
that we had here X\X2 711 ^ 02 . Cf. Num. 21 18. 

14 Reading in Ilcb. 1. 10 DH2 for H 133 . This word 
can also be read H122. 

15 Heb. ibid. y*tnn pp *?22. The last word I took 
to be a corruption of JJBHn . Cf. Ezek. 21 30. Cf. below, 

Heb. p. 12, 1 . 23 ; 15, I. 7 and p. 20, 1 . 23. It seems 
that sometimes the term means as much as the beginning 
of repentance, but in other places it has to be taken as 
meaning till the end of the wickedness in general pre- 
ceding the advent of the Teacher of Righteousness. 


16 Heb. ibid. that is any new things not 

included in DH 2 as dictated by the Lawgiver shall not be 
reached before the end of the days. Cf. also Prov. 2 19. 
The Teacher of Righteousness is expected to rise again, 
when he will appear in the same capacity, or in that of 
the Anointed (cf. p. 12, 1 . 23 and p. 20, 11 . 1 and 32). 

17 See Ezra 2 63 and Nehem. 7 65. 

18 See above, Heb. p. 1, 1 . 11 and p. 3, 1 . 8. 

19 Heb. 1 . 11 1 R 21 H, instead of 1N2. Cf. above, 
Heb. p. 2, 1 . 2, text and notes. Special rules of conduct 
as well as ritual observances are, as it seems, prescribed 
for the members of the Sect wishing toenioy the privilege 
of entering the sanctuary ; otherwise, the doors are shut 
before them. 

» Mai. 1 10 D'rta 'llJD'l D 33 DJ 'O whilst our 
text, Heh. I. 13, omits D 3 and reads by mistake 

21 Mai. ibid. 

22 Here, as it seems, begins the set of rules to which 
the men of the Covenant were pledged, given mostly in 
a negative way. The diction is very awkward, and there 
may be some words missing. 

23 See Deut. 12 a. 

24 Cf. above, note 15. 

25 Cf. Jub. 16 26, a metaphor which may have been 
suggested by Isaiah 1 4. 

28 Sec Heb. 1 . 15 Cnm YE 2 which may also mean 
that they shall take a vow etc. to he separated from etc. 

27 Reading Heb. 1 . 16 pTOI instead of prOL Cf. 
above, p. 4, 1 . 17, and cf. also Test. Levi, 14 5. 

28 See Isa. IO 2 and Ps. 04 6. 

29 Sec Lev. 11 47. Cf. Jub. 6 37. 


Qigrtizco by Mi&osoft 1 > 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


XXXIX 


i$ and the day of fast 30 * according to the command 31 of them who entered in to the 

20 New Covenant 32 in the land of Damascus. | To raise their offerings according to their 

21 interpretation 33 , to love every one his neighbour | as himself 34 , and to strengthen the hand 
Page 7 of the poor and the needy and the stranger 35 , and to seek every one the peace || of 

his neighbour. And no man shall commit treason against his nearest of kin, 

2 separating himself from * fornication 30 | according to the Law 37 . To admonish every 

3 one his neighbour according to the Law 38 , and not to bear a grudge | from day to 
day 39 , and to separate from all the contaminations according to their laws 40 . And 

4 no man shall defile | his holy spirit 41 , *(evcn) as God did separate them 42 . All 

5 they who walk | in these things in the perfection of holiness 43 according to all the 


* instructions 44 , the covenant of God 
Text A 

6 * stands fast to them 4 * | to preserve them for a 
thousand generations. 


U IX And if they settle in camps in accordance 
7 with the * usage 1 of the land and take | wives 

and beget children they shall walk according to 
S the Law, and according to | the * foundations 2 
according to the usage of the Law as He had 
spoken, “between man and his wife and between 
9 father | and his son 3 .” But upon all them that 

30 Thai is the Day of Atonement. 

31 Heb. 1 . 19 . . RV 02 , some letter missing in the MS. 
which I read J11V02. 

82 See Jer. 31 30. Cf. also N. T. 1 Cor. 11 25; 
Heb. B 8. 

33 Referring probably to differences in the question of 
tithes. Cf. Jub. 32 11. 

34 See Lev. 10 18. Cf. also Jub. 7 2, 36 4—8 ; 
Test. Simon, 4 7 ; Issachar, 5 2, 7 6; Dan. 4 3 ; Gad, 
4 2 ; Benjamin, 2 3 ; N.T. John 13 34, 16 12 ; Romans 
12 10. Cf. Schttrcr, lit. p. 347, note 91 (3rd ed.). 

85 See Ezek. 16 49. 

36 Reading Heb. i. 7 niMH, instead of ni 31 t n . Cf. 
above, p. 2, 1. 16, and p. 4, 1. 20. 


Text B = Page 19 in the Hebrew 
stands fast to the?n to preserve them y^/'thousands 
of generations'. *As it is written 2 , “ He keepeth 
the covenant and mercy | with them who love 2 
Him 8 and keep His 4 commandments for a 
thousand generations.” 

But if they settle in camps according to the IX 
laws | of the land which * were 8 from old and take 3 
wives in accordance with the usage of the Law 
and beget childre 7 i \ they * shall walk* according to 4 
the Law and according to the foundations accord- 
ing to the usage of the Law | as He had spoken 5 
“ between man and his wife a 7 id bctwec 7 i father 
and his son.” But upon all the 7 n that despise | the 6 

37 That is according to the law of the Seel forbidding 
polygamy and marriage after divorce. See above, p. 4, 

II. 20, 21, text and notes. 

38 See Lev. 19 17. Cf. below, p. 9, 1 . 2 . 

** See Lev. ibid. See N.T. Romans 12 19. 

40 See Ezra 621. 

41 See above, Heb. p. 5, I. 1 1. 

42 Heb. 1.4 Dr6. The refers to the thing KDO. 

Cf. Lev. 20 25. 

43 Heb. 1 . 5 CHp D' 0712 . Cf. below, Heb. p. 20, 

H. 2, 5. 

44 Heb. 1 . 5 corruption of DH1D', in the sense 

of instructions. Cf. above, p. 4, 1 . 8. See, however, 
below, Heb. I. 8, the possibility of DH1DL 


Text A 

43 Heb. 1. 5 71130X3. Cf. below, Heb. p. 14, 1. 2. 
Cf. Ps. 89 29 suggesting the emendation 7130X3. 

^ IX 

1 Heb. 1 . 6 "pD2 meaning custom, usage. See Rab. 
Diet. s. *pD and X2TD. Cf. below, p. 10, I. 4, etc. 

2 Reading with Text B D'TID'il instead of D'HD'il, 
though the latter meaning “ instructions ” is not im- 
possible. 

3 See Num. 30 17 which however read 17127 2 X )' 2 . 
Cf. below, p. 1 6, I. 10, seq., which is really a continuation 
of the same law, breaking up in this place abruptly. 


Text B 

1 See Heb. p. 7, I. 6. The italics throughout denote 
agreement between Text A and Text B. 

2 Heb. I. 1 32 = 217122 . Cf. Josh. 8 31 etc. 

8 Ileb. I. 2 2 il> 6 . The line over the word is 
probably a sign of abbreviation (V2r;X^). Cf. Deul. 7 9. 

4 Reading with Deul. ibid. VJ11VO for Til VO, which 
is also indicated by the line over the word. 

IX 

Reading Ileb. 1 . 3 1 T 1 for iVil . 

6 Ileb. I. 4 iD^nm. 


Digitized by Microsoft ,fi 


xl 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


Text A 

despise 4 ... when God will bring a visitation 
upon the land will be returned the desert of 

io the wicked; | when there will come to pass 
the word which is written in the words of Isaiah 

n the son of Amoz the prophet | who said, *“ He 
will bring 5 upon thee and upon thy people and 

12 upon thy father’s house days that | have* not 6 
come from the day 7 that Ephraim departed 
from Judah.” When the two houses of Israel 8 

13 separated | Ephraim* turned away 9 from Judah, 
and those who turned back were delivered to 

14 the sword and those who held fast 10 | escaped 
into the land of the North. As He said, “And 
I will cause to go into captivity 11 Siccuth your 

15 King [ and Chiyun your images 12 , from the tents 
of Damascus 13 .” The books of the Law are the 

16 Tent ( of the King, as He said, “And I will raise 
up the tent of David that is fallen 14 .” The King | 

17 is the congregation and Chiyun the images 15 are 

18 the books of the Prophets ) whose words Israel 
has despised 18 , and the Star 17 is he who explained 

19 the Law | who came to Damascus, as it is written, 
“There came forth a Star out of Jacob and a 

20 sceptre shall rise | out of Israel 18 .” The Sceptre 

4 Supply from Text B “the commandments and the 
statutes.” 

5 lleb. 1 . 11 N 1 D' whilst Isa. 7 17 from which this 
verse is taken has 71 K'D' which is reproduced in our 
translation. 

8 Supplying from Isa. ibid. N 5 ? before UO in lleb. 
1. 11. 

7 Heb. 1 . 12 DVD, Isa. ibid. DVD 5 ?. 

8 See Isa. 8 15. 

9 Reading Heb. 1 . 13 ID instead of X\ 

10 lleb. ibid. D'pVTOm. Cf. above, Heb. p. 3, 1 . 12, 
and below, p. 8,1. 2, according to which we should supply 
at least . 

11 lleb. 1 . 14 but Amos 5 26 from where the 

verse is taken has DDXKD 1 “And you have borne.” 

12 Here we must supply from Amos, ibid. DD'H^X DD1D 

DDb DJVDT “The Star of your god which ye 

made to yourselves” as is evident from Heb. 1 . 18 below. 

13 Heb. 1 . 15 pITDT 6nND, but Amos, ibid. n*6ilD 
pD’DD^ “ beyond Damascus. ” 

14 Amos O 11, but there it reads D'pN KV"in DVD 
instead of WlD'pm, Heb. 1 . 16. 

15 lleb. 1. 17 D'D^VH JVD1 D'D^VH VVD 1 of which 
the first two words arc a clerical error corrected by the 
seribc himself. 

1B See Test. Levi, 16 2. 

17 See above, note 12. 

^ 18 Num. 24 17. Cf. Test. Levi, 17 3 and reference 

in the notes. 


Text B 

commandments and the statutes will be returned 
the desert of the zvicked ; when God will bring 
a visitation upon the land \ \ when there will 7 
come to pass the word which is written by the 
hand of Zechariah, the prophet , “O sword, 
awake, against | my shepherd and against the 8 
man that is my fellow, says God 7 , smite the 
shepherd and the sheep shall be scattered, | 
and I will turn mine hand upon the little 9 
ones.” And they that watch him are the 
poor of the flock 8 . | These shall escape at the 10 
end of the visitation 9 , and they that remain 
will be delivered to the sword ’ when there will 
come the Anointed | *from Aaron and Israel 10 . 11 
As it was at the end of the first visitation 
concerning which * He 11 spoke | through Ezekiel 12 
to mark a mark upon the foreheads of them 


7 Heb. 1 . 8 bx, whilst Zechariah 13 7, from where 
this entire verse is taken, has in this place JVNDV 'H. 

8 See Zechariah 11 7. 

9 See Text A, 1 . 2 r. 

19 Reading Heb. 1 . n instead of 

SvXX'V pnx. Cf. below, Heb. p. 20, 1 . 1. 

11 Reading Heb. 1 . 1 1 for SttpirV which is a mere 
clerical error come in through the ^NpfiT in the next 
line. 


Digitized 0 Microcoi: r " 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


xli 


Text A 

is the prince of all the congregation, and when 
21 he will rise “ he will destroy | all the children of 
Seth 19 /' These escaped 20 at the end of the first 
|| Page 8 visitation 21 , || and those who removed back 
were delivered to the sword 22 . And this also 
will be the judgment of all of them who have 

2 entered into his covenant who | will not hold 
fast to these 23 to visit them * with 24 destruction 
through the hand of Belial. This is the day | 

3 on which God shall visit 25 . The princes of 
Judah were *like them that remove the bound. 
Upon them I will pour out my wrath like 

4 water 26 . | For they became diseased incurably 27 
and they * crushed them 28 . * They are all rebels 29 , 

5 because they turned not out of the way | of the 
traitors and they * wallowed 30 in the ways of 
harlots and in the wealth of wickedness 31 and 

6 (in) revenge and every man bearing grudge | to 
his brother and every man hating his neigh- 
bour 33 . And they * committed treason 33 every 

7 man against his next of kin | and were joined to 
unchastity 34 and *sold themselves to wealth and 
gain* 35 , every man of them did that which 

8 was right in his own eyes 86 . | And they chose 


Text B 


that sigh and cry 12 , | but they that remain will 13 
be delivered to the sword that avengeth the 
vengeance of the covenant 18 . And this also will 
be the judgment of all of them who have entered \ into 14 
the covenant who will not hold fast to these statutes 
to visit them with destruction through the hand of 
Belial. | This is the day on which God shall visit, 15 
as He has spoken, “ The princes of Judah were 
like them that remove \ the bound. Upon them 1 16 
will pour out* my wrath 14 like water. Because 
they entered 15 into the covenant of repentance | 
and *yet they turned not out of the way of the 17 
traitors and they dealt wantonly in the ways of 
harlotry and in the wealth of wickedness \ and in 18 
revenge and every man bearing grudge to his 
brother , and every man hating his neighbour . And 
they * committed treason 16 every man \ against his 19 
next of kin and were joined to unchastity and they 
were mighty 17 for wealth and gain , and every 
man | of them did that which was right in his 20 
own eyes , and chose the stubbornness of his heart. 


19 Num. ibid. 

20 Heb. 1 . 21 for See Text B, 1 . 10. 

21 Heb. ptwin for n:icxm. 

22 See above, p. i, 1 . 17. 

23 Supply from Text B, “to these statutes.” 

24 Heb. 1 . 3 “to destruction.” 

22 Supply here from Text B, “as he has spoken.” 

25 Our text, Ileb. I. 4 is defective and corrupt, omitting 
the words ’pUJ 'J'DD 3 after min' and reading X'N 

may cn"?y iiacn for 'may d'do -part* on^y. 

The translation is after Hos. 5 10 and Text B. 

27 Reading Heb. 1 . 4 KEnD Cf. 1 Chron. 21 1 8. 

See also Hos. 5 13. 

28 Ileb. ibid. D’lDpTL Perhaps a corruption of 

DiaovL 

29 Reading Heb. ibid. instead of . 

30 Ileb. I. 5 Cf. above, Heb. p. 3, I. 17. 

81 See above, Heb. p. 6, 1 . 15. 

See above, Heb. p. 7, l. 2. 

33 Reading Ileb. I. 6 lVyO '1 instead of lo'pyn’l. Cf. 
above, Ileb. p. 7, 1 . 1. It is also possible that it is a 
corruption of ^ym . Cf. Prov. 6 18. 

34 Ileb. 1 . 7 nDT 1 ? TO. 

85 Heb. 1 . 7 pnP *niOrH which I took to be a corrup- 
tion of pilP VlDOn' 1 * See however Text B. 

35 Cf. above, Ileb. p. 3, 1 . 6. 

S. (Frags. A & B) 


12 See Ezek. 9 4. 

15 See Lev. 26 25. 

14 Reading Heb. 1 . 16 'Jroy (for mny). See Hos. 
5 10 from where this verse is taken. 

15 The meaning is, u though they entered.” 

*« Reading Heb. 1 . 18 V?yD'l for lD^yn'l. Cf. note 
29, Text A. 

W Heb. 1 . 19 naJJVl. Cf. Isa. 6 22. 


/ 


Digitized by Microsoit 


xlii 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


Text A 

every man in the stubbornness of his heart* 7 
and they separated not from the people 38 . And 

9 they cast off restraint with an high hand | to 
walk in the way of the wicked ; concerning whom 
God said, “ Their wine is the poison of dragons | 

10 and the head of asps that is cruel *V’ The 
dragons are the kings of the nations and their 

11 wine is | their ways, and the head of the asps 
is the head of the kings of Javan 40 , who came 

iz to execute vengeance upon them. | But upon all 
these things they meditated not who builded 
the *wall 41 and daubed it with untempered 

13 mortar. For | one confused of spirit 42 and who 
dropped lies prophesied to them 43 that the wrath 
of God was kindled against all His congrega- 

14 tion 44 | and what Moses said, “ Not for thy 
righteousness or for the uprightness of thine 

15 heart dost thou go to inherit | these nations 45 , 
but because He loved thy fathers and because 

16 He would keep the oath 46 .” | And so is the law 
for the captivity 47 of Israel who turned out of 
the way of the people 48 . Through the love of God 

17 of | the forefathers who * aroused the people 
toward Him 43 , He loved them that came after 

18 them. For to them | is the covenant of the 
fathers, but in his hatred 50 of them who builded 
the 51 *wall His wrath was kindled. And like unto 

37 See above, Heb. p. 3, 1 . 5. 

38 Supply here from Text B “and their sins.” 

38 Deut. 32 33. 

40 Heb. 1 . 11 JV = Greece, relating either to Alexander 
or Antiochus ? 

41 Reading pnn instead of pni"l. Of. above, lleb. 
p. 4, 1. 19, text and notes. 

42 Heb. 1 . 13 which reading is however 

doubtful. 

43 See above, Heb. p. 1, 1 . 14. 

44 Perhaps there are missing at the beginning of Heb. 

I.14 1 X 1 R^I . They remembered not what Moses 

etc. 

45 See Deut. 9 5 omitting however here after HR the 

words nytro '2 oma. 

48 Cf. Deut. 7 8 which however reads M O 

VIDt^OI D2HR. This looks almost as an intentional 
alteration of the text. 

47 See above, p. 4, l. 2, text and notes. 

48 See above, 1 . 8 DyD 11D fiAl. 

49 lleb. 1 . 17 min. Supplying from Text B Oyn. 

50 Reading 1 . 18 instead of W 31 and 

supplying D2 after 12N. 

51 Reading pnn for pnn. See above, p. 4, 1 . 19, 
text and notes. 


Text B 

and they separated not from the people \ and 21 
their sins. And they cast off restraint with an 
high hand to walk in the ways of the wicked; 
concerning whom | God said, 1 Their wine is the 22 
poison of dragons , and the head of asps that is 
cruel l The dragons | are the kings of the nations 23 
and the wine is their ways, and the head of asps is 
the head\of the kings of Javan who came to execute 24 
vengeance upon them. But upon all these things 
they meditated not who builded \ the wall and 25 
daubed it with untempered mortar. For the *man 
walking in wind 18 and weighing storms the 
prophet of * man 19 | to lie that the wrath of God 26 
was kindled against all his congregation, and 
what Moses said | to Israel, 4 Not for thy right « 27 
eousness or for the uprightness of thine heart dost 
thou go to inherit these nations, \ but because He 28 
loved thy fathers and because He would keep the 
oath l So | is the la7v for the captivity of Israel 29 
*who 20 turned out of the way of the people. 
Through the love of God of the forefathers | who 30 
* aroused the people toward 21 God * and he 
loved them that came after them, for to them | 
is the covenant of the fathers. But God hates and 31 
despises them udio builded the wall and His wrath 
zvas kindled against them and against all | who 32 

18 Heb. 1. 25 nn -|^in. Cf. Micali 2 n. 

19 Heb. ibid. PpDD. Micah ibid, however has 

□yn ' d. 

20 Supplying Heb. 1 . 29 before 1“ID. 

21 Heb. 1 . 30 Wyn. Perhaps the writer took it from 
“Ip “Lo gather after,” but which can also be read ITpn. 
The by gives no meaning in either way. Possibly 1 Tyn 
is right, in which case we should have to translate the 
passage, “who bore witness against the people (and) for 
God.” 


Digitized by rlicrosof I n 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


xliii 


Text A 

19 this judgment | it will be for everyone who de- 
spises the commandments of God, and He for- 
sook them and they turned away in the stubborn- 

20 ness of their heart. | This is the word which 
Jeremiah has spoken to Baruch the son of 

21 Neriah, and Elisha | to his servant Gehazi. All 
the men who entered into the New Covenant in 
the land of Damascus 52 . 

62 See above, p. 6 , 1 . 19. Here is a break in the MS. 


Text B 

walk after them. And like unto this judgment 
it will be for every one who despises the command- 
ments of God, | and He forsook them and they 33 
turned away in the stubbornness of their heart . 

So are all the men who entered in to the Neiv 
Covenant \ in the land of Damascusbut they turned 34 
and committed treason and turned away from 
the spring of living waters. | *‘They *shall not 35 
be M counted in the assembly of people, and in 
its writing 23 *thcy shall not be written.' From 
the day when there was gathered in 24 || the only |j Page 
teacher until there will arise the Anointed from 
Aaron and from Israel 25 . And this is also the Law | 
for all that entered into the congregation of men 2 
of perfection of holiness 26 , but he will * cease 27 
accomplishing the statutes that are upright. | He 3 
is the man who is melted in the furnace. When 
his deeds will appear 2 * he shall be expelled from 
the congregation ] as though his lot had not 4 
fallen among them that are taught by God 28 . 
According to his treason they shall record him 30 
* with the men | of * perversion 51 until he will 5 
come back to stay in the station of the men of 
perfect holiness. | And when his deeds shall 6 
appear according to the interpretation of the 
Law in which walk | the men of perfection of 7 
holiness, no man shall * profit 82 him in wealth 
and labour, | for the saints of the Most High have 8 
cursed him. And like this judgment shall be to 
everyone who despises both among them who 

22 Heb. 1 . 35 UCTP tib. Of the only very faint 
traces remain. 

23 Heb. ibid. *QrD 31 . The paper is torn and faded 
in this place but the reading is fairly certain. Cf. Ez. 139, 
from where this verse is taken. 

24 Heb. ibid. meaning “died.” This word is 

followed by TP and HTD which are both cancelled. 

25 See Ileb. above, p. 19, 11 . 10, 11. 

26 Heb. 1 . 2 tnpn D'DD. Cf. above, Heb. p. 7, 1 . 5. 

27 Heb. ibid. pp' which I took as coming from )*¥p. 

It may of course be derived from pp “to abhor,” “to 
despise,” but the first seems to me to be more probable. 

28 Heb. 1 . 3 ysnrn. Cf. below, 1 . 6. I think how- 
ever that in both these cases it is a corruption of ITlirQ 
“deteriorate.” The yDb"Q may have come in from 
below, 1. 25. 

29 Sec Isa. 54 13. 

30 Heb. 1 . 4 irniTDT', which was probably followed 
by DV. 

31 Heb. 1 . 5 myD. See Heb. Diet. s. my. 

32 Heb. 1 . 7 mN'. See Heb. and Rab. Diet. s. J 11 X. 

Here it means probably to “associate.” 

/ 2 


Digitized by Microsoft r " 


xliv 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


Text B 

were before | and among them who came after 33 , 9 
who placed idols upon their hearts and walked in 
the stubbornness | of their hearts. They have 10 
no share in the house of the Law. Like the 
judgment of their neighbours who returned | with 11 
the men of scoffing 54 they shall be judged. For 
they uttered error against the statutes of right- 
eousness and despised | the covenant and the 12 
pledge of faith which they have affirmed in the 
land of Damascus ; and this is the N ew Covenant 55 .) 
And there shall not be unto them or unto their 13 
families a share in the house of the Law. And 
from the day | when there was gathered in the 14 
only teacher 56 until all the men of the war were 
wasted who walked | with the man of lies about 15 
forty years 37 . And at the end of these there will 
be kindled | the wrath of God against Israel as 16 
He said, ‘There is no King, and no prince 36 ,’ 
*and no Judge, and none | rebuking in righteous- 17 
ness 39 . And they who turn from sin ... 40 who 

observed the covenant of God man| his iS 

brother He will support their steps in the way of 
God. ‘And God hearkened | and heard and a 19 
book of remembrance was written before Him 
for them that fear God and think | upon His 20 

name 41 ’ until there will be brought up 42 

salvation and righteousness for them who fear 43 
God. Then shall ye return and discern between 
the righteous | and wicked, between them that 21 
served Him 44 and them that served Him not.” 

83 Heb. u. 8, 9 Mnnaai owswia dkdh 
T he meaning is not quite clear whether the despiser is 
one of the D'JIB’SCO etc. or the etc. were the 

object of his contempt. 

** Heb. 1 . 1 1 JlV^n Cf. Heb. p. i, 1. 14. 

35 Cf. above, Heb. p. 6, I. 19 and p. 8, 1 . 21. 

36 Heb. 1. 14 nnr. Cf. above, Heb. p. 3, 1 . 8 and 
p. 6, 1. 11. 

37 Heb. 1 . 15 D'yiDN* DWD . Sec above, Heb. p. 1, 

1. 10 DntfT D'Jty. 

38 See lios. 3 4. 

39 This quotation TDK (Heb. II. 15, 16) 

must rest on some confusion by the scribe of Biblical 
verses such as Isa. 11 4 and Hosea 3 4. 

40 After the word Heb. 1 . 15 we have a trace of 
a ' which may have been the beginning of 3py\ Cf. 

Is. 59 21 ( 2 pm). 

41 See Mai. 3 16. 

" Heb. 1 . jo r6j?\ 

43 Heb. ibid. DH'XII DnUt^l, etc. The largest part 
of this line is faded, but the reading as given in the lext 
is fairly certain. Cf. Mai. 3 18. 

44 Heb. 1. 21 *QJJ. Traces of letters follow which 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOK1TE WORK xlv 

Text B 

“ And showeth mercy *unto thousands 45 of them 
that love Him | and unto them that observe 
*His commandments 46 for a thousand genera- 
tions,^ ” from the* house of Peleg 47 that have 
gone out from the city of the sanctuary. | And 
they confided in God at the end of the treason 
of Israel and they polluted the Sanctuary and 
they came back unto God. | The * prince of the 
people 48 with few words 49 ... according to His spirit 
they shall be judged... in the counsel | of holi- 
ness. And all they who broke through the 
bound of the Law of those who entered into the 
covenant when there will shine forth | the glory 
of God to Israel they will be cut off from among 
the camp and with them all they who do 
wickedly 60 1 of Judah in the days of its trial 51 . But 
all they who hold steadfast to these laws to go 
out | and to come in according to the Law and 
listen to the voice of the teacher and shall confess 
before God... we | are guilty, we and our fathers 
because they walked contrary 55 unto the laws of 
the covenant | and true is thy judgment against 
us. And they will not lift the hand against 
His holy statutes, His righteous judgment | and 
the testimony 83 of His truth. And they will be 
chastised by the first judgments in which | the 
children of the men of the only one were 
judged. And they will listen to the voice of 
the teacher of righteousness. And they will not 
* answer 64 | the statutes of righteousness when 
they hear them. They will rejoice and be glad 

may be taken as a L They may also be taken as a b, 
which would be the remainder of See Mai. ibid. 

45 Sec Exod. 20 6 which the scribe partly confused 
with Deul. 7 9. See above, Heb. p. 19, 1. 17. After 
IDn Heb. 1. 11 there is space for 

46 Heb. 1. 2 1 omitting by mistake the word 

vmvn. 

47 Heb. I. 22 JV3D, reading doubtful. Before 
these words a space of nearly two words appears blank, 
but no traces of letters are visible. 

46 Heb. 1. 34 TD2 > but only the Z and the "] are certain. 

49 Heb. 1. 24 OyD nnm, but the reading is 
doubtful. 

60 Heb. 1. 27 probably as much as 'yCH. 

51 Heb. 1 . 27 vnunvD. 

w See Lev. 26 n. 

« Heb. 1. 31 mnjn. Cf. above, Heb. p. 3, 1. 15. 

54 Heb. 1.3*2 llPw” “answer” or rather “contradict.” 


22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 

32 

33 


Vigrtizcd ty Microsoft ■ 


xlvi 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


*i X II Page 9 
2 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

io 


1 1 


12 


»3 


Text B 

and their hearts will exult 65 and they will show 
themselves mighty | against all the children of 34 
the world, and God will make atonement for 
them and they will see 56 His salvation for they 
put their trust in His holy name. 

55 Reading Meb. 1 . 33 ttyM for NJN. 

M Heb. 1. 54 T) being a remainder oOXII. 

Any man who will destroy a man 1 * in accordance with the statutes of the 
gentiles* so that he is to be *put to death 2 , | *it is concerning him 3 that He said, 

“ Thou shalt not avenge nor bear any grudge against the children of thy people 4 /’ And 
every man of them who hath * entered 5 | into the Covenant who shall bring a* charge 6 
against his neighbour which is not* proved 7 before witnesses | and* shall beat 8 him in 
his fierce wrath or *speak against him *to his elders so as to insult him, is taking 
vengeance and bearing grudge; | but it is only written, “He 9 will take vengeance of 
his adversaries and He is bearing grudge against His enemies/’ | If he held his 
peace from day to day 10 but in his fierce wrath he spake against him in a matter 
concerning death 11 | his* sin is upon him 12 because he did not fulfil the commandment 
of God who said to him, “Thou shalt surely rebuke | thy neighbour 13 and not suffer 
sin upon him.” As to the oath concerning which | He said “thy hand shall not help 
thcc 14 ,” if a man will make *another *man swear in the open field 15 1 — that is not* in 
the presence of 16 the judges or their word 17 — his hand has helped him. And he who 
has lost | (anything), and it is not known who has stolen it from the* Tent 18 of 
the camp in which the thing has been stolen, its owner shall* proclaim 19 | it by 
the oath of cursing 20 , and whoso hears, if he knows and utters it not, he shall be 
guilty 21 . | In any* recompense made 22 for that which has no owners he who makes 


H X 

1 Heb. 1 . 1 D 1 RD DIR Onn\ The D 1 KD I took to 
be a dittography. The expression was probably suggested 
by Lev. 27 tg DIRn ]D Dm' DID ^ 3 . 

2 Heb. ibid. rrDi"6 that is according to the laws of 
the DM 3 . 1 take this law to contain a prohibition against 
acknowledging the jurisdiction of the gentiles (mR 3 *“)y 
D'U which is also forbidden by Rabbinic law. 
Cf. Maimonides, Mis htteh Torah, Hilcoth Sanhedrin, 
ch. 26, § 7, text and reference given by the commen- 
tators. 

3 Heb. ibid. fcOH followed by Heb. 1 . 2 which 

1 read TS. 

4 See Lev. 27 28. Cf. above, Heb. p. 7, 1 . 2. 

* Reading Heb. I. 2 'R 2 D instead of ‘ROD. 

6 Heb. 1 . 3 “tin. Cf. Deut. 22 20. See also Heb. 
Diet. s. v. 

7 Heb. ibid, n Dim. Cf. below, 1 . 18. Cf. Test. 
Gad, 4 2, 5, to which our text seems to be a partial 
parallel. 

8 Heb. 1. 4 IROm, corruption of IPOm* 

9 The verse in Nahum 1 2 reproduced here reads 
rivb 'n Dpi:, our scribe avoiding the Tetragrammaton. 

10 Cf. Num. 30 15. 


11 Heb. 1 . 6 DID 33 “Q meaning perhaps that he 
accuses him of a capital offence. It is however possible 
we should read here HDR for HID, that is even if it be 
true. 

12 Reading Heb. 1. 7 U Uiy for H2 PUy. 

13 lleb. 1 . 8 “pH, but Lev. 19 7 reproduced here has 

TO- . 

u See 1 Sam. 25 26 and 31, where the \ ? “p 1 y^’IH 
is considered an act of violence amounting to bloodshed. 
Cf. Baba Kama , 27 and Tur, Choshen Mishpath , S 4, 
where the principle of n'D’D: 1 ? SOH tW'N TDy. 

15 See Lev. 14 7 etc. 

36 Reading Heb. 1 . 10 Dsb instead of 
17 lleb. ibid. D 3 DRD that is the decision of the 
judges. 

• 8 Reading Heb. 1 . 1 1 1 J 11 DD (= 1 J ?0 bnX) instead of 

nxoD. 

19 Reading ibid. y'DD* instead of y' 3 D” and taking 
I'^Va ibid. as the subject. For a somewhat similar 
institution in Rabbinic Judaism see Baba Mezta 28 b. 

20 Cf. Num. 621. 

21 See Lev. 5 1. 

22 That is, for a bl’D . 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


xlvii 


*4 


15-16 


17 

18 
>9 

-20 

21 

22 


2 3 

|| Page 10 
2 
3 

IT XI 4 

5 

6 

7 

8 
9 


the recompense 23 shall confess to the priest, | and it shall all belong to him, besides 
the ram of the guilt offering. And so everything lost that was found and has no j 
owners it shall belong to the priests, for he who* found it 24 knows not its law. | If 
its owners were not found they shall keep it in trust. If a man acts treacherously J 
against any law and his neighbour sees it and he is only one — if it be a charge of 
death he shall make it known* | in his presence to the Censor, proving 26 it to him. 
And the Censor shall write it down with his hand ; until he will do it | again before 
one, *and then he shall come back and make it known to the Censor. If he will 
be caught again before | another, his sentence shall be finished 26 . And if they are two 
and they witness* against | him in another thing 27 the man shall be only excluded 
from the Purity 28 , if they are trustworthy. | And on the day on which the man sees 
it he shall make it known to the Censor. And according* to the statute ... 29 two 
trustworthy witnesses, and through one* witness to exclude* from the Purity. And 
there shall rise no || * witness 30 before the judges to kill at his mouth 31 whose days 
were not fulfilled to pass | among them that are numbered 32 * and who fears* not 33 
God. No man shall be* believed as a witness against his neighbour | who transgresses 
a word of the commandment with a high hand until he was worthy to repent 34 . | 
And this is the usage 1 of the judges of the congregation 2 . Ten men selected 3 } 
of the congregation according to the *age 4 ; four of the tribe of Levi and Aaron 
and six of Israel | learned in the Book of *the Hagu 5 and in the foundations of the 
covenant, from five | and twenty years old even unto sixty years old 6 . But none shall 
be appointed after he be | from sixty years old and above to judge the congregation. 
For through the unfaithfulness of man | his days* diminished 7 , and when the wrath of 


23 Heb. 1 . 14 3 C?lDn participle hifil of 31 EL Perhaps 
it is a corruption of Supplying, of course, 

DtTNn. Cf. for the law Num. 5 8 of which our text 
looks almost like a paraphrase. 

u Heb. 1 . 15 fVNSlD for nNVID. 

25 Heb. 1 . 18 1 P 3 D 1 ? !T 3 im. Cf. above, 1 . 3. The 
office of the 1 p 3?3 a sort of censor or inquisitor is 
unknown otherwise. 

* Heb. 1 . 20 D^B\ This third inx or TTIX 

(1. 20) is apparently the third witness. 

27 Heb. 1 . 2 1 "inN "Q"J, in contradistinction of "131 
HID (?). The meaning of this law and the one that 
follows is not clear to me. It would seem as if in the 
case of death our Text insists upon three witnesses, whilst 
in other cases, punished only by the exclusion from the 
ninD, two witnesses are sufficient ; whilst the words, 
“and through one witness to exclude from the Purity,” 
in I.23, perhaps refer back to the case of death, that the 
evidence even of one witness has the result of exclusion 
from the Purity. 

28 Heb. ibid. rpHOn meaning perhaps the Camp 
or the congregation. Cf. Heb. p. 12, II. 5, 6. 

29 Heb. 1 . 22 pinn *?2?1. The latter word 1 first read 
Jinn by mistake. The MS. is faded and the middle of 
the next word is partly torn away, only a ' being visible 
at the beginning. The remaining letters are 1 ^ 3 . I can 
only suggest that it is a remainder of “they shall 
accept,” but there is no trace of the leg of the Kof. 


30 Reading Heb. 1 . 1 Ty or "iy for liy. Cf. Deut. 
19 15 * 

81 See Deut. 17 6. 

82 That is, who have not reached the age of twenty- 
five. Cf. Exod. 30 13 and 14. Cf. below, 1 . 6. 

33 Supplying before NT Heb. 1 . 2, the word N^l. 

34 Heb. 1. 3 31^6 13 ? iy “to do repentance.” Cf. 
also Num. 15 30 TO"! T 3 “presumptuously.” 


If XI 

1 Heb. 1 . 4 ~pD. Cf. above, Ileb. p. 7, 1 . 6. 

2 This word myn, Heb. 1 . 4, is followed by ny 
which I took as mere dittography. 

8 Ileb. 1 . 5 D*"IH 3 . Cf. Jtr . Kiddushtn , 66 a , 
l'HN3^ JHTl3n with reference to the appointment of 
officers. 

4 Ileb. 1 . 5 nyn. It may also mean “for the time 
being. ” 

0 Heb. 1. 6 linn "i 3 D 3 . cf. Ps. 49 4 num, 

“ meditation.” What is understood by this lin, whether 
a special book of the sect or the regular Scriptures I am 
unable to say. 

9 Cf. Num. 8 24 and Lev. 27 7. 

7 Reading Heb. 1 . 9 W for 1 D\ 


xlviii 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


God* was kindled 8 against the inhabitants of the earth, he said to remove 9 their | 
10 minds before they shall complete their days 10 . 

H XII ii As to be cleansed in water. No | man shall wash in filthy waters or not sufficient 1 

12 for ^immersion 2 of a man. | None shall cleanse himself in the *waters 3 of a vessel. 

13 And every pool in a rock in which there is not sufficient | water for* immersion which 
an unclean person has touched, its waters shall be contaminated * like 4 the waters 
of the vessel. | 

H XIII 14 As to the Sabbath to keep it according to its law, no man shall do work on the sixth 
15-16 day | from the time in which the globe of the sun 1 | is removed from the gate in its 
17 *fulness 2 , for it is He who said, “ Keep the | Sabbath day to sanctify it 3 .” And on the 
iS day of the Sabbath no man shall utter a word | of *folly 4 . And surely none shall 
demand any debt of his neighbour 5 . None shall judge on matters of property, and gain 6 . | 
19 None shall speak on matters of work and labour to be done on the following morning 7 . | 
20—2 r No man shall walk in the field to do the work of *his affairs 8 | on *the day 9 of the 

22 Sabbath. None shall walk outside his city* more 10 than a thousand 11 cubits. | No man 

2 3 shall eat on the day of the Sabbath but of that which is prepared 12 or perishing* | in 
I 1 Page n the field 13 . None shall eat or drink but *from that which was* in the camp 14 . || *But 

if he was 16 on the way and went down to wash he may drink where he stands, but 


8 Reading Heb. ibid, nnPDl for jnTUl. 

9 neb. ibid, -no b as much as Ton 1 ?. 

10 Cf. Jub. 23 11. 

nr xii 

1 Heb. L 11 HD D'D’IJJEI. Cf. the following line. 

2 Heb. ibid. b'yiD which I took as a corruption of 
b'2DD. Cf. Erubin 4/^, and reference given there, 

;na r6ii> isu 

8 Reading Heb. 1. 12 102 for 1D2. This law seems 
to be directed against D'21XP D'D “drawn water,” 
which also according to the Rabbinic law is unfit for 
immersion. Cf. Maimonides, Hilcoth Mifrwaoth, ch. 4, § 3. 

4 Reading Heb. 1. 13 >D'D2 for 'D'D2. 

H XIII 

1 Heb. 1. 15 W>3. In Rabbinic non '3 see 

Rabb. Diet. s. ^3^3. See particularly Jer. Berachoth ib 

nnrorn pa ini mpe6 nan ^3 b'nnn. 

2 Reading Heb. 1. 16 lRl^Oa for IXlSo. Perhaps 
we should emend 1X122 “at its setting.” 

8 Deut. 5 i2. Perhaps it is the word HOP which 
is urged deriving from it what is known in Rabbinic 
literature as DEDin, that is the time added to a holy 
day before it actually begins. See Eos A I/ashauah , $a 
and cf. Rabb. Diet. s. D2D1D. See Hadasi, Alphabeta, 
and Gan Eden by the Karaite, Aaron the Elder, 37 a, 
and Bashiatsi, p. 40 seq., and 45^. 

4 Ileb. II. 17, 18 122 meaning probably the same 

as bin '121, that is matters of a secular nature which 
must not be discussed on the Sabbath. The Rabbis 


derive this prohibition from Isa. 5 8 13. Cf. Shabbath> 

1 50 <2. See also Maimonides, Mishneh Torah , Hilchoth 
Shabbathy ch. 24. 

6 Heb. 1. 18 ba injro nc' Sn p~n. a. Deut. is 2 . 

9 Heb. 1. 18 y¥2l pi. See Mishne Beza v. 2. 

7 Heb. 1. 19 D'2Pob. Cf. Mishne Bikkurim in. 2. 
Cf. Rabb. Diet. s. D2P. 

8 Reading Heb. 1. 20 WSll or 1VDI1. This probably 
only means to plan the work for the following day. Cf. 
the references given in note 4. 

9 Supplying at the beginning of Heb. I. 21 the word 
DV2. 

10 Heb. ibid, by, but is preceded by a word looking 
somewhat like IX. Perhaps it is a corruption of *]X, 
but it is more likely to be a mere clerical error, the scribe 
having first written by mistake IX, and correcting himself 
afterwards by the proper word by. 

11 Heb. 1. 21 f)b«- No such “Sabbath limit” how- 
ever is known. Probably it is a mere clerical error for 
D'sbx. Cf. Heb. p. 11, 1. 6. See also Jub. 50 8, text 
and note. 

12 Heb. 1. 22 plOH, that is destined or prepared for 
this purpose from the eve of the Sabbath or the feast. 
Cf. Mishne Beza I. 2. See also Rabb. Diet. s. )12. 
Cf. Jub. 50 9 and 2 29. 

13 “The field.” Of the Heb. equivalent H1P2 1. 23, 
only the »1 is certain, whilst there is also a faint trace of 
the 1. 

14 Supplying Heb. 1. 23, IPX, after the DX. 

15 Supplying at the beginning of Heb. p. 11 DX1 
HM, though the possibility is not excluded that we have 
here a lacuna in the MS. 


Digitized t>y Microsoft 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZA DO KITE WORK 


xlix 


2 he shall not draw | into any vessel 16 . No man shall send the son of the stranger 17 to 

3 do his affairs on the day of the Sabbath. | No man shall put on garments that are 

4 filthy or were brought by a gentile unless | they were washed in water or rubbed off 

5 with frankincense 18 . No man shall * mingle 19 of his own will | on the Sabbath. No 

6 man shall walk after the animal to feed it outside of his city more than [ two thousand 

7 cubits 20 . None shall lift his hand to beat it with his fist. If | it be stubborn he 
shall not remove it out of his house 21 . No man shall carry anything from the house | 

8 to the outside or from the outside into the house and if he be in the* gate 22 he shall 

9 *not carry out | anything of it or bring 23 in anything into it. None shall* open 24 

10 the cover of a vessel that is pasted on the Sabbath. No man shall carry | on him 
spices 25 to go out and *come in on 26 the Sabbath. None shall 27 move in the 

11 house* on the day of the Sabbath 28 | rock or earth. No nurse shall bear the suckling 

12 child 29 to go out and to come in on the Sabbath 30 . | No man shall *provoke 31 his man- 

13 servant or his maidservant or his* hireling 32 on the day of the Sabbath. | No man 

14 shall deliver an animal on the day of the Sabbath 33 And if it falls into a pit | or 
ditch, he shall not raise it on the Sabbath 34 . No man shall *rest 35 in a place near| 

15 to the gentiles on the day of the Sabbath. No man shall profane 36 the Sabbath for 

16 the sake of wealth and gain. | And if any person 37 falls into a * gathering of water 

17 or into a place | of 88 ... he shall not bring him up 39 by a ladder or a cord or 


16 The meaning of these laws is to be found in the 
interpretation of Exod. 16 29, Jub. 60 8 and 2 29. 
Cf. Singer, p. 199 and Charles’ notes to Jub. ibid. Cf. 
also Hadasi, Alphabeta , 147. 

17 Heb. 1 . 2 " 13 : H p. See Isa. 56 6. 

16 This law does not refer exactly to the Sabbath, but 
to all the days of the week on account of contamination 
(nXDltt). See Introduction, p. xxv. 

19 Heb. 1 . 4 Meaning obscure. Perhaps it is 

a corruption of TyY, which would mean as much as to 
be hungry, or to starve oneself, thus containing a pro- 
hibition against fasting on the Sabbath. Possihly, it is 
a direct corruption of rUUJV. Cf. Jub. 50 12. 

20 See above, note 1 1 . 

21 Cf. Jub. ch. 2 29, text and notes. 

22 Reading Heb. 1 . 8 M 3 D for miD. Cf. Rabb. Diet, 
s. '130 and RITE. About this law in general, cf. Jub. 
2 29, 30 and 50 8. 

33 Reading Heb. 11 . 8—9, SW-XW, instead of 

Ri'-Kvr. 

24 Reading Heb. 1 . 9 nnD' for nn 2 . Cf. Hadasi, 
Alphabeta , 148. The Rabbinic law is very mild in this 
respect. See Shabbath, 14 6 a, and Maimonides, Hilchoth 
Shabbath , ch. 23, § 2. See also Jost, III. p. 303. 

25 Heb. 1 . 10 D^DD, more correct D'JDOD. Cf. 
Rab. Diet. s. jOOD and JOD. Cf. Mishneh, Shabbath 
vi. 6. Tosefta, ibid. v. 10 and T. B. Shabbath 65a 
where a similar law is to be found. 

26 Reading Heb. ibid. though in the MS. the 1 

is a little short and looks like 

% 27 Heb. ibid. SlDL Cf. Rab. Did. s. bo: and bebo 
The latter is more common in such connection. 

S. (Frags. A & P>) 


28 Reading Heb. ibid. rQ’JTI DV for 

29 Cf. Num. ll 13. 

30 Cf. Mishneh, Shabbath , xvm. 2, and Maimonides, 
Hilcoth Shabbath , ch. 18, par. 16. 

81 Heb. 1 . 12 &OD\ 

32 Reading Heb. ibid. IT ’3 for HD 1C\ 

33 See Mishneh, Shabbath xvm. 3 where we have 
such a law with regard to the festivals ( 31 D DV). Cf. 
Tur Orach Chayim , par. 339. 

34 Reading Heb. 1 . i4^1DH for^'SH. The Rabbinic 
law is less strict. Sec Shabbath , 129^, and Maimonides, 
Hilcoth Shabbath , ch. 25, par. 25. 

35 Reading ibid. 1. 14 for that is, not to 

stay over ihe Sabbath in a gentile vicinity. Cf. Wreschner, 
pp. 14 — 15, for a similar law of the Samaritans and the 
Karaites. 

36 Heb. 1 . 15 perhaps a corruption of 

Perhaps we have to understand by ir the piohibition of 
buying and selling on the Sabhalh. Cf. Jub. 50 8. 

37 Ileb. 1. 1.6 DTK 

38 Heb. 1 . 16 DIpD D'D DipD D'D Sx. The first 
D'D is cancelled in the MS. DIpD is undoubtedly a 
corruption of mpD, cf. Lev. 11 36, which emendation 
is reproduced in the translation. After the second DIpD 
some word is missing. 

39 Assuming that Heb. 1 . 17 reads and lhus 

refers to the in the preceding line. For the 

Rabbinic law in this respect, see Yoma , 84 and Mai- 
monides, Hilcoth Shabbath , ch. 2, par. 7. It is more 
probable that some words are missing at the end of the 
pieceding line, and that 1. 17 is the beginning of a new 
law. 

g 


: • -*Jd £>/ Microsoft 11 


1 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


18 


•I XIV 19 
20 
21 


22 


n 

|| Page 12 

2 

3 


4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 


1 1 

12 


instrument. No man shall bring anything on the altar on the Sabbath, | save the 
burnt-offering of the Sabbath, for so it is written, “Save your Sabbaths 40 .” 

No man shall send | to the altar burnt-offering or meat-offering or frankincense 
or wood through the hand of a man contaminated by any | of the uncleannesses 1 , 
allowing him 2 to contaminate the altar, for it is written, “The sacrifice | of the 
wicked is abomination, but the prayer of the * righteous is like an offering of 
delight 3 ,” And everyone who comes into | the house of * worship 4 he shall not enter 
when he is contaminated * without 5 washing. And when the trumpets of the Congre- 
gation sound | it shall be (done) before or after 6 , and they shall not disturb the whole 
service *on the Sabbath 7 || it is holy. No man shall lie with a woman in the city 
of the Sanctuary to contaminate | the city of the Sanctuary by their uncleanness 8 . 
Any man over whom the spirits of Belial will have dominion | and he will speak 
rebellion 9 , he shall be judged according to the law of the “ Ob and Yiddeoni.” And 
he who will err | to profane the Sabbath and the Feasts shall not be put to death ; 
but 10 it is upon the sons of man | *to watch him 11 * whether 12 he will be healed of 
it. And they shall watch him seven years and then | he shall come into the 
Congregation. None shall stretch out his hand to shed the blood of any man 
from among the gentiles | for the sake of wealth and gain 13 . Nor shall he take 
anything of their property in order 14 that they blaspheme not, | unless by the counsel 
of the * Congregation 15 of Israel. No man shall sell an animal | or bird that is 
clean to the gentiles in order that they sacrifice them not 16 . Nor shall he | sell them 
anything of his threshing-floor or his winepress in all his * property 17 . Nor shall he 
sell them his manservant or maidservant | who entered with him into the covenant of 
Abraham 18 . No man shall make himself abominable 19 | with any living creature or 


40 Perhaps he is referring lo Lev. 23 38 nimi? " 13^0 
'H interpreting it to mean “save ihe Sabbath of the Lord” 
on which the burnt offering and the meal offering etc. 
recorded in the preceding verse are forbidden. Of course 
the correct translation is “ beside the Sabbaths of the 
Lord.” More probable it is that we have here a reference 

to Jub. 50 10, “and rest thereon from all labour save 

burning frankincense and bringing oblations and sacrifices 

for Sabbaths,” which the scribe in some way confused 

with the preceding law and wrote ^X, instead of 
CT' and then omitted several words which might 
easily be supplied from Jub. 

IT XIV 

1 Reading I. 20 HlXlDlDn for mXIDDn* 

2 Heb. ibid. inienr6. See Rabt. Diet. s. run 
or 'Cl. 

3 Prov. 15 8, but the second clause of the verse reads 

there D'X* “The prayer of the upright 

is his delight.” The reading |l¥“l nmD3 DP"lV n^SfU 
as our text has it (Heb. 11 . 20, 21) is undoubtedly corrupt 
and points to a confusion with Prov. 15 29. 

4 Heb. 1 . 22 mnnirn H '3 lit. the house of prostration, 

cf. the Arabic ^ ^ . Cf. Levy’s IVorterbuch fiber die 

Targumim n. 141 about JimUD 1 V 2 and 1TJD JV 3 ,but 
it is never applied to a Jrivish place of worship. The 
term is strongly suggestive of the Falashas’ Mesgeed. 


5 Supplying ibid, after XDD the word ^3 or X^> 3 , cf. 
above 1 . 4. But it is also possible that it means as much 
as a XDO who is in need of D 133 . Cf. Lev. 11 14 and 
15 10. See also 2 Chron. 23 19. 

6 Heb. 1. 23 -)DXrV IX D 3 plV which may also mean 
be it earlier or later. 

7 lleb. ibid. but only the H is traceable whilst 

the other letters are torn off. The meaning of the law is 
entirely obscure to me. 

8 Heb. 1. 2 Dm:i 

9 See Deut. 13 6. 

10 Heb. 1 . 4 ' 3 . 

11 Heb. 1 . 15 Perhaps a corruption of 

nix6. 

12 Reading DX for DX 1 . 

13 The meaning of this law is that he is only permitted 
to kill a gentile when it is a case of self-protection. 

14 Heb. 1 . 7 - 1 UV 3 . 

15 Heb. 1 . 8 "inn, cf. Rab. Diet. s. (Tymn. 

18 That is to their idols. Some similar laws are to be 
found in Mishneb, Aboda Zarak 1. 8, and 9. Cf. also 
the Gemara to these Mishnas. 

17 Heb. 1 . 10 nXE ^ 33 . Perhaps we should read 
DTIXD “for all their property” that is for any money. 
See Rab. Diet. s. 

18 For a similar Rabbinic law see Mishneh, Gittin iv. 6, 

19 Cf. Lev. 11 43. 


digitized by Microsoft 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


li 


13 creeping thing, to eat of them the beehives 20 , even 21 any living creature | that moveth 

h in the waters 22 . Nor shall the fish be eaten unless they *were split | alive and 
*their blood was shed 23 *. But all the locusts after their kind shall come into fire 

15 or into water ) whilst they are still living, for this is the manner of their creation 24 . 

16 And all wood and stones | and dust which will be polluted by the uncleanness of 

17 man * shall be polluted like them 25 *. According to ] their uncleanness shall be 
unclean he who toucheth them. And every instrument, nail, or pillar in the wall 1 

is which will be with the dead in the house shall be unclean, ^ like the uncleanness 20 of 
an instrument of work 27 . | 

X\ 19 And * this is the usage 1 of the settlement of the cities of Israel, according 2 to 

20 these judgments to separate between | the clean and unclean 8 and to make known 

21 *the difference between the holy and the profane 4 . And these are the statutes | *to 
instruct 5 to walk in them the whole nation 6 * according to the law 7 ...* every 

22 time 8 . And in this law 9 | shall walk the whole seed of Israel and they shall not be 


20 iieb. 1. 12 nnmn ^oyo dtd bixb. The dhd 

is probably a mere clerical error, whilst the D'TIDTiT ^jyD 
means as much as the Rabbinic □H'lDT nTilD, cf, 
Jastrow s. JVMD. I do not remember any sect that 
forbade honey, though there was the consideration that 
it comes from an unclean insect, cf. Beehoroth yb. 
Perhaps it refers to particles of the bees which are mixed 
up with the honey. Rabbinic Judaism had no scruples 
in this respect and allowed the honey as it came from the 
bee-hives (see Shulchan Aruck y Jorth Dcah § 81), whilst 
the Karaites protested and insisted on a preparation of 
the honey (through filtering) so as to separate these 
particles. Cf. Salmon b. Jerucham’s denunciation of this 
less stringent usage of the Rabbanites Tyi D'DUID 

ni 56 noxi Dnirn jtai? n'nn ‘onion n'cniv 
-nasi pic'll pc',-! 1 risen onum noix 'tc'd 

. D'lDI D 01 D 1 (MS). Cf. Eshkol Ilakkofer Alphabet a, 
236. See however, Introduction, p. xxiv. 

21 lleb. 1. 12 Ty. It is not impossible that this is a 
shortened quotation from Lev. 11 43 — 46 which began 

ainca (v. 43) to v. 46. 

22 Cf. Lev. 11 46. 

23 Reading and supplying Heb. 1 . 14 DDT “|IS 1 D 0 L 

The is almost certain though the S is torn off 

whilst there are also definite traces of the DDT. This 
agrees in part with the view of the older Karaites and 
Samaritans, who forbade the eating of fish that died in the 
water or were found dead on the shore. Cf. Wreschner, 
p. 51. The splitting of the fish had, according to this 
writer, to be done by one of the Sect, as the HD'DR, 
according to some Samaritans and Karaites, had to be 
done by a Jew. Emphasis has also to be put on the 
DDT 1DDOL The law is directed against the Rabbinic 
opinion permitting the eating of the blood of fish. See 
Sifra 39 a and Kerithoth 20 b. 

24 See Wreschner ibid. p. 52, about the mode of killing 
the locusts in water. As to meaning of the last words, 
“for this is the manner of their creation.” See Chuliin , 
27 £, where we have a homily to the effect that cattle 


have to he killed in a certain way because they were 
created out of the dry land (earth) ; fish, again, require 
no killing, being created out of the water ; whilst birds, 
which were created out of alluvial mud (a combination of 
water and earth) occupy also, with regard to their ritual 
killing, a middle place between cattle and fish. The 
notion was thus that the mode of killing is in some way 
connected with the element out of which the animal in 
question was created. We may thus assume that in the 
composition of the locust, according to our author, the 
elements of water and fire are to be found, hence they 
shall be killed by water or by fire. According to the 
Rabbinic law, the locust requires no killing at all. See 
Maimonides, Mi shriek Torah , Hilchoth Shechitah, ch. 1. 1, 
and Tur Joreh Deah , § 13. 

25 Reading Heb. 1 . 16 D 1102 lSxiJ' for 102 ' 'Vl!W 
Dm referring to the DlXfl fl'RD 03 . The 1 of the IOC* 
may also be taken as a final ). 

26 Reading Heb. 1 . r8 J 1 X 0 D 3 for DX 0 D 3 . 

27 Heb. 1 . 18 my 0 ^ 3 . Cf. Num. 31 51. Both 
this law and the one preceding it are in contradiction 
to the Rabbinic law, exempting all these things from 
ilNDID . Cf. Mishneh Kelim xn. 3 and Maimonides, 
Hilchoth Kelim , ch. x. 1. 

If XV 

1 Heb. 1 . 19 "JTD. Supplying at the beginning of the 
line the word HH as below, 1. 22 and elsewhere. 

2 Supplying Heb. 1 . 19 'D after 

8 Lev. 11 47. 

4 Cf. Lev. IO 10. See also Num. 35 24. 

5 Reading Heb. 1 . 21 S'DD\tS for ^‘DD’dS, though 

(for the wise man) is not absolutely wrong. 

* Heb. ibid. irta. 

2 Reading Heb. ibid. D 22'03 for D 2 rO^>. 

8 Iieb. ibid. nyi. Of the preceding word some 
traces remain which may be taken as ny. 

9 Heb. ibid. DDI^DDI meaning as much as DDPDD1 . 

Cf. p. 6 , 1. 10, (cm) nos -£nnr 6 . 

g 2 


Vigitizttf i y t fict osof: ■ 


Hi 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


23 cursed. And this is the usage of the settlement | * congregation 10 in the end 

!| Page 13 of the wickedness and until there will arise the Anointed *from Aaron 11 . || * and 

7 Israel — till ten men at least 12 by thousands and hundreds and fifties | and tens 13 . 

And when there will arise ten, the man who is a priest learned in the Book of the 

3 Hagu 14 shall not 15 depart. According | unto his word shall they all be ruled 10 . And 

4 if he is not tried 17 in all these but a man of the Levites is tried | in these, then the 
lot shall be cast 18 that all those who enter into the camp shall go out and come in 

5 according to his word 10 . And if | there be a decision regarding the law of leprosy 
* which 20 a man will have, then shall come the priest and stand in the camp, and 

6 the Censor 21 shall instruct him | in the explanation of the law. And if it ^increased 22 , 

7 he shall shut him up for unto them | is the judgment 23 . 

XVI And this is the usage of the Censor of the camp. He shall instruct the 

8 many in the deeds | of God, and shall make them understand *His mighty wonders 1 , 
and shall narrate before them the ^happenings of eternity 2 *in the Law of 

9 God* 3 , | and shall have mercy with them as a father with his children, and shall 

10 * forgive all their rebellions* 4 . Like a shepherd with his flock 5 | he shall loose all 

11 the bonds of their knots 6 7 oppressed and crushed *in his congregation* 8 . | And 

everyone who shall join his congregation, he shall count him according to his 

12 *deeds° his * understanding 10 , his might, his strength and his property. | And they 
shall record him in his place in accordance with his * assignment 11 through the lot in 

13 the camp 12 But no man of the children of the camp shall rule | to bring a man into 


10 The MS. is both faded and torn in this place. The 
..bnn which is taken as bnp in the translation is very 
doubtful. Before traces of nS may be seen. 

11 Reading Heb. p. 12, I. 23, and p. 13, 1 . 1, 
bsOtrai pnND m"TD for b.XX"l priN'D. Cf. Heb. 
p. 19, 11 . io, ti, and p. 20, 1 . 1, text and notes. In my 
first reading of the MS., 1 assumed that there is a lacuna 
in the MS. between p. 12 and p. 13, as indicated by 
the asterisks at the bottom of p. 12. But further study 
convinced me of the continuity of the text, as it proceeds 
on p. 13, to give interpreting details to the 3 CMD "flD 
on p. i2, remaining in force till the advent of the Messiah. 
Cf. p. 6, 1 . 10, which is an exact parallel, only that there he 
calls the ‘‘Messiah,” the Teacher of Righteousness, l. 1 1. 

12 Heb. 1 . 1 OyiDp, the consisting of ten men 

at least. 

13 Heb. ibid. WKW. 

14 See Heb. above, p. 10, 1 . 6. 

16 Ileb. 1 . j C’D’ bf<. Cf. Exod. 33 1 1. 

16 lleb. 1 . 3 ^pC*. Cf. Gen. 41 40. 

17 Heb. ibid. pm. 

18 Cf. Josh. 19 1 etc. Heie it seems to be a mere 
phrase = it shall be decided. 

19 Cf. Num. 27 21 etc. Apparently if there is a 
priest (|HD) be comes first. 

20 Supplying Heb. 1 . 5 before iY\T the word 

21 See above, Heb. p. 9, 1 . 17 etc. 

22 Reading lleb. 1 . 6 instead of 'HD. But it is 
also possible that (fool, ignorant) is correct. The 
meaning would be that even in the case when the priest 
is an ignorant man and has to be instructed by the 


Censor, the act of shutting up the leper had to be done 
by the priest. Cf. Stfra, 60 b, and Mishnth Negairn 
III. 1, for a similar law. 

23 Cf. Hos. 6 1. 


V XVI 


1 Reading Heb. 1 . 18 for 
5 Heb. 1 . 8 ably nr™. Cf. Heb. above, p. i, 1 . io. 

3 Reading Heb. ibid. .T nm; for iVmSD. Perhaps 

this word is a corruption of “details.” See 

Rab. Diet. s. tT 0 . 

4 The MS. is tom and probably also corrupt in this 
place. The translation assumes the reading and emenda- 


tion in lleb. 1. 9 DnmD ‘p!) 1 ? (for 0311 X 10 ). 

8 See Isa. 40 1 1. 

6 See Isa. 58 7 which suggests the emendation of 
DrvniytJH (wickedness) instead of DHHtyp in Heb. 1 . 10. 

7 The MS. is torn in this line (10) as indicated by the 
dots. The traces left suggest also some sueh words 


dht 'nab, or '» 'nj?b. 

8 Reading Heb. ibid. imi>3 for »mj? 3 . Cf. also 
Deut. 20 33. 

9 Heb. 1. 11 supplying the y which is torn 

away. 

10 Ileb. ibid, tauri as much as 

11 Heb. 1 . 12 irniV which I took to be a corruption 

from See above, 1. 4. It is also possible that 

the word is a corruption of 1 D 1 IT “genealogy,” “pedi- 
gree.” Cf. Rab. Diet. s. DIP!'. 

12 Supplying Heb. ibid, after the H the letters HiTO, 
or my “congregation.” 


Digitizzo by Knc/osoit fi 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


liii 


14 


15 

16 


17-18 
*9 
20—21 
|| Page 14 22 
2 


HXVII3 

4 


5 

6 

7 

8 


9 


the congregation * without the 13 word of the Censor of the camp. | Nor shall any man 
of them who entered into the covenant 14 deal with 15 the sons of the * strangers 10 
^unless | hand to hand 17 . No man shall perform a *thing as 18 buying and selling 10 

* unless he has spoken 20 | to the Censor of the camp and he shall do 21 and not... 

| and so to him who expels 22 and he | afflict 23 him and in 

the love he shall not incline 24 | they, 25 and he who is not connected with | 

And this is the settlement of the camps. All [shall not succeed to settle in the 

land 20 | ||that have not come from the day that Ephraim 

departed from Judah 27 . And all they who walk in these | the covenant of God *is 
steadfast to them 23 to save them 29 from all the snares of the pit, for suddenly ... 30 | 
*And this is the usage 1 of the settlement of all the camps. They shall be 
counted alT by their names, the Priests first, | the Levites second, the children of 
Israel third 2 , and the proselyte fourth 3 . And they shall be recorded by their 
names | one after another, the Priests first, the Levites second, the children of Israel 
third, and the proselyte fourth. And so they shall be seated and so they shall ask 
for everything 4 . And the Priest who will count | *the many 5 shall be from thirty 
years old and upwards until sixty years old 6 learned in the book ... 7 | in all the 
laws of the Torah to *speak them 8 according to their rules. And the Censor who is | 
over all the camps shall be from thirty years old and upwards until fifty years 


13 Supplying Heb. 1. 13 after liyn the word *?20. 
The MS. is here torn. 

14 See Heb. above, p. 2, 1. 2. It is not unlikely 
that the ^X here is a mere dittography. Heb. 1. 14 

m2 \X2. 

18 Heb. 1. 14 *?X ^>X JV12 'X2. I took the second ^>X 
to be a mere dittography. Cf. above, Heb. p. 2, 1. 2, 
and elsewhere. This is followed by SxS?' ^X, but the 
trace of the } is very uncertain, and on closer examination 
I found it to be a 1, thus reading jn' ^N1 XC” ^X meaning 
“to deal,” “to have money transactions.” Cf. Rab. 
Diet. s. X2>3. 

18 Heb. 1. 14 -inirn '32 which gives no meaning, and 
which I emended 12311 '2. Cf. above, Heb. p. n, 1. 2. 
Before the '32 some short word is torn off which may have 
been HX or Dy. After HY^H is also room for another 
short word, probably '2. 

17 Heb. 1. 15 sp 1 ? ep. See Prov. 16 5 I' 1 ? T. 
Cf. also Epstein, pp. 68, 74, note 5. The 5)2 ny'pH is 
one of the various ways of affirming a money transaction. 
Yet the meaning remains unclear to me. 

18 Supplying Heb. ibid, after t^'X the word 121 of 
which traces are fairly visible. 

19 Supplying the letters 12ID1D^1 tnplD^. 

20 Supply Heb. ibid, the end of the line 1£X of which 
some faint traces are visible. 

21 Hch. 1. 16 nCT'li before which the letters H3 still 
remain, which points to H3TO. 

52 Heb. 1. 17 PUD 1 ?. Perhaps it reads “ open 

place.” The two other words remaining in this line offer 
no clue. 

23 Heb. 1. 18 1.113P, the reading of which is very 
doubtful, most of this line being torn off, and what 


remains is very faded. After the word 7321X21 we have 
the letters t3H. 

24 Heb. ibid. HE', reading uncertain; and so is the 
following . . 2H . . which may perhaps also be taken as 
QH2 or Dn\. 

25 Heb. 1. 19 DH, but some faint traces of a possible 
t? are visible before the DPI. 

26 Only a few letters giving no words remain of 1. 22, 
whilst h 23 is entirely missing! 

27 See Isa. 7 17. Cf. above, Heb. p. 7, 1. 11. 

28 Cf. Heb. above, p. 7, 1. 5. 

29 Heb. 1. 2 nb'Virb instead of D 

50 At the end of the line we have the letters y31 (which 
are certain), followed by traces of letters, the first of which 
may be a 3, but also perhaps 2. Perhaps we have here 
some corrupt quotation from Mai. 3 1 D'Xn2**n321. 

ir xvn 

1 Reading Heb. 1. 3 "|1D 111 for yiDl. 

2 Heb. 1. 4 DnB^U’, below, 1. 6 DnC’1 ( X\ 

3 Heb. ibid, y'31 Uni. 

4 Heb. 1. 6 ^>3^ I'/K’w"' pi, which however may also 
mean they shall be asked (1^X3”), that is whilst sitting in 
counsel when they are asked for their opinion. 

0 8 Reading l. 6 HX for 2*X . 

6 See Lev. 47 3 and Num. 4 3, but our numbers 
correspond with neither of these precedents. 

7 The MS. is here torn off. Perhaps we should 
supply 13.11 as above, Heb. p. 10, 1. 6. 

8 Reading D121^ though only the roof of the 1 
remains now. Perhaps the meaning of this word is “to 
guide them.” See Rab. Diet. s.v. 121. 




V.rjm zed 1 />•* ttficro.i oft 


liv 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


10 

1 1 


12 

H XVIII 
»3 
U 


*5 

16 

>7 
18 — 19 
20 


21—22 


HXIX 
II Page 15 


old 9 ^married 10 in all | counsel of men, and in every tongue 11 According to his 

word shall come in they who enter the Congregation | every man his share 12 . And 
everything concerning which any man shall have to speak he shall speak to the 
Censor, | with regard to any controversy or suit 13 . 

And this is the usage of the many to prepare 1 all their needs. The amount j 
of their offerings *are 2 for every moon 3 . ..And they shall give it into the hands of 
the Censor and the judges. | From it they shall give for the *poor 4 and from it 5 
they shall strengthen the *hand 6 of the poor and the needy. And to the aged man 

who | to the man who * wanders 7 and to him who was * captured 8 by a strange 

people, and to the virgin who 9 | *he who has 10 none seeking after him 11 all 

the labour 12 ... and not | And this is the explanation of the settlement 

| And this is the explanation of the judgments which | Aaron 

and Israel 13 and he will forgive our sins | in money 14 and he knows ] 

punishment six days and he that speaketh | against 


Moses 15 | 

|| 1 and also with Aleph Lamed and also with Aleph Daleth 2 , but an oath 

of the * covenant 3 | by the curses of the covenant. But the Law of Moses 4 


9 See above, note 6. 

10 Heb. 1 . 9 which I read ^-iy 3 . According to 

this the sect would insist upon the marriage of the as 

the Rabbis did with regard to the high priest. Possibly 
it is a mere dittography of the following ^ 33 . It is 
also possible that it is a corruption of XJ. It would 
then be connected with the DHV 3 X HIM of the next line, 
“coming into every assembly of men.” Cf. Gen. 49 6. 

11 The MS. isheretom and only the letters reproduced in 

the text remain. The "1 of has the Babylonian vowel *1. 

12 Heb. 1. 11 nnn C”X. See Gen. 15 10. 

13 See 2 Sam. 15 4. 


10 Ileb. 1 . 16 %”X of which word however only the T 
remains. 

11 Heb. I. 16 tnn ;\\\ Cf. Jer. 30 17. 

12 Only very faint traces remain here in the MS. 
representing perhaps 12V “slave.” 

13 Probably we had here 'P pHXD mC‘D. Cf. 
below, Heb. p. 18, 1 . i. 

14 Heb. 1 . 20 J 1 DD 2 the preceding letters are very 
uncertain. 

18 Heb. 1 . 22 Hi ? 03 which however is uncertain as it 
may also be read D 2 CTD 2 . There were also on this line 
traces of +§?. Line 23 is entirely missing. 


II XVIII 

1 Heb. 1 . n i'3.-6. 

2 Heb. 1 . 12 Dil jnonn. But the reading is very 
doubtful, and the faded letters look also like D'D' OCV 
“two days.” It would then perhaps mean that the 
earnings of two days in every month should be set apart 
for certain communal purposes. 

3 The MS. has here D- • • Dil as reproduced in the 
Heb. text, ibid, the middle letters being tom off. DDC'DH 
(“the law,” “rule”) is the word which suggests itself. 

4 The MS. is tom and faded in this place as indicated 
in the Heb. text, 1 . 14 UV • ■ • nyi which may perhaps 
be corrected into D'Oy HID. It may also be a cor- 
ruption of D0H3 (priests). 

8 Heb. ibid. OD; but there are also traces of a D 
after the I. I thus read 13 DD 1 for ODDI. 

8 Reading Heb. ibid. Y 3 for ill. Cf. Ezek. 16 49. * 

7 The MS. is mutilated here. I first read VP, as repro- 
duced in Heb. 1 . 15, but on closer examination I find that 
it may be read yiP “who is wandering,” that is, homeless. 

8 Reading and supplying Heb. 1 . 15 Y^X^l. 

9 Scarcely legible traces are left here of letters 3 r6 } 
which could be construed into ^X 13 rb ]'X “who has no 
near kinsman.” Cf. Ruth 3 9 and 12. 


H XIX 

1 Here perhaps some leaf or leaves are missing in 
the MS. The first word of this page (Heb. p. 15, 1 . 1) 
is faded and the last letter is discernible V which suggests 
yit?' “ he shall take an oath.” 

2 Heb. 1 . 1 rb'l'l DJI "ID^ «|^N 3 DJI. That 
is /N of D'D^N and 1.X of 'JIN . Cf. Mishneh, Shebuoth 
IV. 13 n"'S"l 51 ^* 3 ... DD’^y 'JvX y' 3 t*D. Cf. also 
T. B. Shebuoth 3 $a and Afasecheth Soferin , ed. Joel 
MUller, pp. vii and 58. 

3 Reading and supplying with fair certainty, Iieb. 
ibid. Inman nyutr. The line probably finished with 
IX “ or the curses,” etc. Even in its present defective 
state what remains of the text allows us to assume that we 
have here a law that one shall take no oath either by the 
full name (the Tetragrammaton) or by any other name 
of God, such as Elohim or Adottai. The Samaritans, 
according to the well-known statement in Jer . Sanhedrin , 
28 were in the habit of taking the oath by the Tetra- 
grammaton. Cf. Kirchheim, Karme Shomron y p. 26. 
Our Sect only allowed the oath by the covenant. 

4 Does this mean to swear by the Law ? Cf. Shebuoth 
38 b min " 0 D 3 nyi 2 w>; but there it does not mean to 
swear by the Law but to keep the scroll. 


Digitized b t f roso t 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


lv 


3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

1 1 
12 
! 3 


14—15 

16—17 
il Page 16 


^IXX 3 


he shall not mention 6 , for 6 *.. | And if he swears and transgresses he will profane the 
Name 7 . And if by the curses of the Covenant | the Judges. And if he trans- 

gressed he is guilty and he shall confess and shall return and shall not bear... | 8 death. 
And he who enters into the covenant for the whole of Israel a statute for ever 
with their children *that 9 ... | to pass among them that are numbered 10 by the oath of 
the covenant they shall confirm it upon them. And this is also | the law in every 
end of the wickedness 11 , for everyone who returns from his corrupt way. On the 
day of his speaking | with the Censor of the many they shall count him by the oath 

of the covenant that Moses established | with Israel. The covenant 12 * Moses 

with all heart 13 ... | soul everything be found to be done in them 14 .... And no man 
shall make known to him 15 the | laws until he will stand before the Censor 16 be * per- 

suaded 17 by him when he examines him. | And when he will confirm it upon him to 

return to the Law of Moses with all his heart and all his soul | of him if 18 

and everything which was revealed of the Law with regard to a controversy 19 j 

in him 20 the Censor him and shall command him | until 21 * killed 

him 22 and the madman and all | till ^daughter 23 | 

|| covenant with you and with the whole of Israel. Therefore 

the man shall confirm it upon ^himself 24 to return to | the Law of Moses for in it 
everything is * exactly explained 25 . 

As to the explanation of their ends 1 *for a remembrance 2 | to Israel of all 
these, behold, it is exactly explained in the Book of the Divisions of the Seasons 3 1 


8 Reading Heb. 1. 2 T3P for 313?L 

8 After '3 “for” the MS. is hadly faded, but traces 
of letters H • • HT3, but everything must be con- 
sidered as very uncertain. 

7 Heb. 1. 3 DC'n ^>m that is by his transgressing the 
oath he is profaning the Name. Cf. Lev. 19 12 . At the 
end of the line probably the words '3^6 X3 V are missing. 

8 Probably some such word as jiy is to be supplied 
here. Cf. Lev. 17 16. This law as given in the text 
seems to be a corrupt condensation of Lev. 5 4, 5 and 23. 

9 Heb. 1. 5 X'X though very little trace remains of 
the *1. Traces of letters indicated by the dots look 
somewhat like y • D • \ Perhaps we had here VT?V. 

10 See Exod. 30 13. The meaning of the law seems 
to be that their children shall take an oath by the 
covenant when mustered in the congregation, that is 
at the age of thirty as above, Heb. p. 14, 11. 3 and 6. 

11 Heb. I. 7 VuHH )‘p, that is in the case of repentance. 
Cf. above, Heb. p. 6, 11. ro and 14. 

12 Hch. 1. 9 n'"nn DX. These words are followed 
by wb suggesting yiEC^ “to obey.” The b that comes 
next may be the remainder of min*? followed by iltyO. 

13 Heb. ibid. 3^ which is followed by the trace of a 1 
forming probably the remainder of ^>331 . See below, 1. 1 2 . 

14 Heb. 1. 10 D3 which may be a corruption of H3 
“in it,” that is, in the Torah. The MS. is torn in this 
place only traces of illegible letters remaining, of which 
nothing is decipherable except the 

15 Heb. ibid. 1PUTP\ 

18 The word following Heb. 1. 11 indicated by dots 
read probably X’X “who.” 


17 Ileb. ibid. nHDlV the reading of which however is 
very doubtful. The word looks somewhat like THEfT. 
The paper is tom in the middle of the word. Perhaps, 
it read 13 C'lDIV “he shall inquire into him,” that is, into 
the novice or penitent. 

18 Heb. 1. 13 DN. The "1 following it is very doubtful. 
The left traces look also somewhat like ■ • 3' or D*. 

18 Heb. ibid. 3'~b. Cf. above, p. 14, 1. n. 

20 Heb. 1. 14 13. The word is preceded by the trace 
of a 1 and followed by traces of 1 ' . 

21 Heb. 1. 15 which I first took as 33. Then 
come some very faint traces of *1Dy or 1DV or D'O. 

22 Ileb. ibid. IHOH which is however very doubtful. 
The left traces may also read IflDH or IpEOn . All the 
remaining single letters are very doubtful. 

23 Heb. 1. 17 n3, which is however very doubtful, 
whilst it might also be the ending of any number of words 
like H33% etc. The last six lines are entirely missing. 

24 Reading Heb. 1. 1 1*^33 for TPS3. 

25 Heb. I. 2 pipHtt. See Rab. Diet. s. pH and pi . 


Il XX 

1 Heb. 1 . 2 □ PPXp tyVEI. cf. above, Heb.p. 2, 1 . 9. 

2 Reading 1. 2 jlXtb for jWiy^. 

3 Ileb. '33’31 '31^ D'fiyn nip7nC. By this un- 
doubtedly the Book of Jubilees is meant, though no such 
full title of this Pseudepigraphic work is thus far known. 
See Charles, Introduction , p. xiv seq. See also the Pro- 
logue to the book, p. 1 . 


Viqttiiocf by Microsoft 


FRAGMENTS OF A ZADOKITE WORK 


ivi 

4 according to their jubilees and their weeks. And on the day on which the man 

5 will confirm upon himself to return | to the Law of Moses the angel of Mastema 4 

6 will turn away from behind him if he will fulfil his word. | Therefore Abraham was 

circumcised on the day of his knowing *it 5 . As to what He said, “that which is 

7 gone out of thy lips | thou shalt keep 6 ” to confirm, every oath of a bond 7 by which 

8 a man will confirm upon himself | to perform a commandment of the Law till the 

9 * price of death 8 he shall not redeem it 9 . Everything which [ ... 10 a man upon himselP 1 ... 

»o till price of death he shall not confirm it 12 | the oath of the woman 

11 which * Moses said 13 to disallow her oath 14 . No man | shall disallow an oath which 

12 *no man knew* 15 . It is to be fulfilled. As to disallowing 16 | if it is to transgress the 

covenant *then he shall disallow it and not confirm it. And so is also the law for 

13 her father. | As to the law of * offerings 17 , no man shall vow anything for the altar 

14 under compulsion 18 . Nor | shall the * priests 19 take anything from the Israelites 20 

15 a man * dedicate the food 21 | this is what he said, “They hunt every man 

16 his brother with a net* 22 .” Nor | shall devote of all his possession | 

1 7 — 1 9 holy shall be punished... | he who takes a vow | to 

the judge 23 

4 He b. 1 . 5 HDDw’On Cf. Juh. IO 8, text 

and notes. 

8 Heb. 1 . 6 injn DVD, that is, the importance of this 
law and its inherent virtue consists in man’s being saved 
from the power of Mastema and other demons. Cf. 

Jub. 15 26, 32. 

8 Deut. 23 24 . 

7 Cf. Num. 30 3. 

8 Heb. 1 . 8 HIE TnD Dy, meaning perhaps, “the 
risk of death.” 

9 Heb. ibid. lfllB’ bs. Perhaps we should read 
bITO (“he shall not make it void”) for 1iTlD\ See 
also below, note 1 1 . 

10 There is before the Heb. 1 . 9 the trace of a Q 
which suggests D'p' “confirm.” 

11 Heb. ibid. 1 ^ 33 , followed by a b, Before the 

we have distinct traces of m, but between the b and 

the m there is enough space to supply miinn |D TId 6 
to “turn away from the Law.” We might now explain 
these laws in the following way. First, that a man 
is bound to keep his vow pledging him to a particular 
commandment of the Law, even at the risk of death, 
having no powers of annulling it; second, that a man is 
bound not to keep his vow even at the risk of his life, if 
this vow was intended to abolish a commandment of the 
Law. The second JMD TflD Dy may be a mere ditto* 
graphy, coming from the preceding line. 


12 The missing word in this place at the beginning of 
Heb. 1 . 10 must have been ^?y (Heb. p. 10, I. 14 etc.) or 
nm “as to.” 

13 Supplying ibid. ntttD TON* 

14 See Num. 30 6, 8, 9. 

18 Heb. 1 . 11 supplying the dots D*HN rnui X?, which 
however is very doubtful. There is a trace of a 3 after 

the y ofyT. 

16 That is as to the concession which the Scriptures 
make to the father and to the husband, in this respect 
they refer only to cases where the vow involves a breach 
of the Law. 

17 Heb. 1 . 13 mfTOin. The roof of the 1 is still 
fairly discernible. 

18 Heb. ibid. DUN. 

19 Reading and supplying Heb. at the beginning of 
1 . 14 DUDDni. 

20 Probably here was some word like HpirD “by 
force.” After this there is room for a small word like 

21 Heb. ibid. C’N CHp’. If we put before 

it as suggested in the preceding note, then we should 
translate “nor shall a man devote.” 

22 Corrected and restored Heb. ibid, after Micah 7 2, 
Dnn HIV' irrnx nN C”N. The meaning of the law is 
not clear to me. 

23 The last lines are entirely missing, whilst from the 
preceding four lines, only a few words remain. 


I liQitizcd t v Microsoft r " 


CORRECTIONS TO THE HEBREW TEXT 

TEXT A. 


Heb. p. i, 1. 2 

4 
1 1 
20 

P- 2, 1. 3 

9 

15 
20 

P- 3. >• 1 

21 

p. 4, 1. 17 

17 

21 

P- 5» !• 3 

12 
13 

16 

p. 6, 1. 1 

2 

5 

10 

18 

P- 7, 1- 5 
8 

16 

p. 8, 1. 7 

10 

17 

p. 9, 1. 2 

3 

S. (Frags. A &B) 


an for nn 

nnw for nnxsy. 

Blank equal to the space of one word between and pVV 
pin for pm- 

n'lE^ini may also be read iT’BnnV 
DH'Sp may also be read DITXp* 

may perhaps be read a^Xa* 

Supply after the word ^E^X* 

n'in2^/a , l for the n, however, is doubtful. 

Omit interrogation mark after D'lSnv 

Blank equal to the space of a short word after nWl* 

pnn for pnn, after which we have a blank equal to the space of a 
short word. 

cnix for dhix. 

nnSJ twice, but the first is cancelled, 
for 

mp'I for 'p'l. 

DrrnMyn for Dni^jn. 

"inxp for nnx». 

Dp'l for np'v 

m for vm 

may be also read JflBnn* 

Sin b for SinS- 


HID' may be also read HID 1 - 

DniDn may be also read DniDTI- 

Supply blank equal to space of short word after nSsjn- 

pnS for pnb- 

Blank equal to space of one word after D*£5J?n» 

ITjnn may be also read WJTPl* 

“)0X* It seems that the scribe wrote originally ^t^X but corrected it 
into tok. 


vijn for mjn- 


A 


Digitized by Microsoft 1 


lviii 

Heb. p. 9, 1 . 14 

22 

22 

23 

p. 10, 1. 15 
18 
20 

p. 11, 1. 2 

13 
23 

p. 12, 1. 3 

P- 13. 1 - s 
10 

14 
16 

l8 

18 

18 

J 9 

22 

P* 14, 1 . 8 

14 

16 


19 

p. 15, 1. I 


CORRECTIONS TO THE HEBREW TEXT 

The blank is before ^n, and it is not impossible that this word was 
cancelled by the scribe and corrected by the following pV 

pinn for pnn- 

hi for f M but there is no real certainty about it. 

D’lp' , but not certain. May perhaps also be read 'lJDIpV 

Before 'ty'tyn we have the letters cancelled by the scribe. 
pi) may also be read JHV 
♦Jffln may also be read 

but the ' is hardly discernible now. 
bisn may also be read ’rsn. 

, , , is very doubtful. 

DSPM for bsbtbd. 

DSD'D for d'sc'jd. 

on, the letter very doubtful. 

in' kb* bx *?x mn for jn' bn bn&' bn rvin- The first 

is probably to be pointed 

At the end of this line are traces of something like a ft and then of 
an ^ and a 
inuy very doubtful, 
ton* The tD very doubtful. 

ntD\ may be read The ) after the to is certain, 

nfc^pj, the n very uncertain. 

* f p| looks something like D'tOSt^n* The & and the Q are fairly certain. 

didp 6 , may also be read mm 1 ?- 
I'D for ilD- 

After rniD^> room for one word before xSl- The last letter is still 
visible, representing a T, something like a * preceding it. There 
is also some sign which may be taken as a This would suggest 
the remainder or corruption of *"p£ 3 . 

Before pHX we have the letter p|» undoubtedly the remainder of Hlt^S* 
ny’DK' may also be read nyiit^* 

Some traces of such letters as HI and perhaps also after '3 
at end of line. 

The at end of line is followed by a n thus making “lt/ f X* Then 
there are at the end some signs which may perhaps be taken as )]}. 


'ion ; 


5 


CORRECTIONS TO THE HEBREW TEXT 


lix 


TEXT B. 


Heb. p. 19, ]. 26 
35 

p. 20, 1. I 

12 

20 

2 5 

33 


Between imy and blank of two words. 

last letter of this word not quite certain. 

At the beginning of the line there are signs of some letters now illegible, 
but, as it would seem, they were cancelled by the scribe. 

Before PlJlbiO, sign of one or two letters cancelled by the scribe. 

After nSy\ sign of one or two letters cancelled. 

IBHp for ; C-Hp followed by a blank of two words. 

’pH doubtful. 


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO TRANSLATION 

AND NOTES 


p. 2, 1 . 7 

TO 


p. 4, 1. 8 


p. 5, 1. 19 


Heb. DlpD- Cf. Ps. 74 2, and Prov. 8 22 j*“|K 'D"lp»- 

Heb. HD It was suggested to me by the Rev. J. Ac Montgomery that 

it is probably equal to the Syriac and has to be translated until 

that . 

Interpretation of the Law. Heb. rHinn 8 PWB 3 cf - P- 6, H. M, r8 and 20, 
and p. 13, 1 . 6. On p. 20, 1 . 6 we have rniHn tJHTG- Cf. also p. 7, 1 . 18 
about the minn tPyri- Cf. also p. 7, 11. r, 2, and 3 where seems 

= the Sect insisting that the particular laws mentioned there (p. 6, 1 . 18 — 

p. 7, 1 . 3) should be observed according to their own or This 

suggests the possibility of our having in p. 20, 11. 31 and 32 ...D'D3£I^33 nD'nPVl 
' 13 1 ) a parallel to our passage in p. 4, 1. 8 ’HD'HiT) would then 

mean “to be instructed.” The or is contained in the Book of 

Jubilees and similar Apocrypha which the Sect considered authoritative. 

(note 35). In connection with this subject, the following extracts from the 
Jerahmeel MS. in Oxford, kindly copied for me by the Rev. M. Segal, 
will not be uninteresting : 

xnaai ynv Dm&cn era vn d*bb>3& d mx w myi 
T1X3 imw a rvBE03 (?) mn wy own p3D& ixni 0*3 
omi pt? onsao nnv D'scoai oSiyn ,Tnn *]b j\si y'pnb ny 
cbiyn bib nnw dhhb nSa: nytrn nb\yb vrv nwa: pap nnpy 
oyiv pt? tvepa m mbo hb> vn jodm w )bbn) .lbn 
obn cnb rvi&yh Sjo'o yVia' vn y'pnb ny ybiy vn 

D*ny wan vosS new nwjnna nark 'jvnaji ’ttyo ipyx to 
D'PB nn vn *6 -p So DHDiy nt?p maysva “pa nayw Mn D'y^n 
"(toy tw D nxoa hapn nn'tv paw D^nariy on yby tp nSn 


(I 


lx 


ADDITIONS AND CORRECTIONS TO TRANSLATION AND NOTES 


rnpri 'ax to p npy trtbyn p3i ■pun dx xbx wumj 
d^bpi t& D*a x^x i*?b* xSt? inm d^bto onix min jmaab 
anal dtd' msi 'isr inns nyt? nnix3 jnna Sy3 dm "pro jiiddm 

"■pap onnn *pix:i 

Cf. Dr Gaster, The Chronicles of JerahynecL liv. and p. 150. London, 1890. 

Cf. also Sec. SnXV 


p. 6, L 2 
p. 10, 1. 18 

p. 11, 1. 10 

p. 12, 1. 13 

p. 15, 1. 8 

p. 19, 1. 12 


Heb. Hpn, read Dp'), “and He raised up.” 

(note 4). Cf. also Jub. 49 8, “ or whoever says he will do something on it,” 
but the meaning is not quite clear to me. 

(note 28). Perhaps is in contradistinction to a term occurring 

sometimes in Karaitic literature. It would then mean even in a locality 
which has the advantage of being rQEH/E i n which he may move all 
other things he must not move rock or earth. 

(note 4). Add — Meaning obscure. Perhaps we have in this law a protest 
against the Rabbinic interpretation of Lev. 1 X 36 according to which not only 
the fountain or pit remained clean but also the water therein. Cf. D. Hoffmann, 
Das Buck Leviticus, p. 349, and other commentaries ancient and modern. 

Heb. VTnpS'- Perhaps it has here the meaning of “to remind him.” 

Heb. D'pJfcO) D'PUXT An expression which the Karaites applied to their own 
sect. Cf. Pinsher, Lekute Kadmoniyoth Nispaehwiy p. 101. 


TITLES OF SOME OF THE WORKS QUOTED IN THE INTRO- 
DUCTION AND NOTES, BUT NOT GIVEN IN FULL 


Abul-Fath, Abufathi Annales Samaritaniy ed. 
Eduardus Vilrnar, Gothae, mdccclxv. 

Beer, Das Buck der Jubilaen und sein Verkdltniss 
zu den Midraschiniy B. Beer, Leipzig, 1856. 

Hadasi, 1 S 3 H Sd^X, by Judah Hadasi, Go- 
zolowa, 1836. 

Tost, Geschichtc des Judenthums und seiner Sec - 
teriy Dr J. M. Jost, Leipzig, 1857. 

J. Q. R., The Jewish Quarterly Review y ed. by 
I. Abrahams and C. G. Montefiore (20 
vols.) London. 

Jub., The Book of Jubilees... translated and ed. 
by Dr R. H. Charles, London, 1902. 

Kirchheim, j'nEIE' Introductio in librum 

Talmudicum “de Samaritanis,” Raphael 
Kirchheim, Frankfurt a.M., 1851. 


Kirkisani, Kirkisani, published by Dr A. Har- 
kavy in Memoirs of the Oriental Depart- 
ment of the Imperial Russian Archaeo- 
logical Society, vol. vin. (1893-1894) St 
Petersburg, 1894. 

Montgomery, The Samaritans , The Earliest 
Jewish Secty Dr James Alan Montgomery, 
Philadelphia, 1907. 

Revue y Revue des Abides Juives } Paris. 

Singer (Wilhelm), Das Buch der Jubilaen oder 
die Leptogenesisy 1. Theil, Stuhlweissenburg, 
1898. 

Test., or Testaments, The Testaments of the 
Twelve Patriarchs, translated and ed. by 
Dr R. H. Charles, London, 1908. 


n 


INDEX* TO REFERENCES TO BIBLE, APOCRYPHA AND RABBINIC 
LITERATURE IN NOTES OF DOCUMENTS OF JEWISH SECTARIES 

VOL. I. 


Genesis 




26 45 

p. 1, I. 4; p. 6, 1. 2 

1 

27 

p. 4, 1. 21 


27 7 

p. 10, 1. 7 

6 

5 

p. 3. i- 2 


27 28 

p. 9, 1. 2 

7 

9 

p- 5. i- 1 


27 29 

p. 9 . 1 - 1 

7 

22, 

23 p. 2, 1. 20 


Numbers 


10 

32 

p- 3. i- 1 


4 3 

p. 14, 1. 7 

14 

*3 

p- 3. i- 4 


5 8 

p. 9, 1. 13 

15 

IO 

p. 14, l. n 


5 21 

p. 9, 1. 12 

18 

25 

p. 1, 1. 2 


8 24 

p. 10, 1. 7 

41 

40 

p- 13. '• 3 


11 13 

P- II, I. II 

49 

I 

p. 4, 1. 4 


14 29, 43 

P- 3 i I- 7 

49 

6 

p. 14, 1. 9 


15 30 

p. 10, 1. 3 

49 

26 

p. 1, 1. 15 


15 39 

p. 2, l. l6 

Exodus 




16 2 

p. 2, 1. 11 

16 

29 

p. 11, 1. 2 


21 18 

p. 6, 11. 4, 9 

20 

6 

p. 20, 1. 2 1 


24 17 

p. 7, 11. 20, 21 

30 

13 

p. 10, 1. 2; p. 15, 

1. 6 

27 21 

P- 13. 1 - 4 

30 

*4 

p. IO, 1. 2 


30 3 

p. 16, 1. 7 

33 

8 

p. 1, 1. 13 


30 6, 8, 9 

p. 16, I. IO 

33 

1 1 

p. 13, 1. 2 


30 15 

p. 9, 1. 6 

34 

6 

p. 2, 1. 4 


31 51 

p. 12, 1. l8 

Leviticus 



35 24 

p. 12, 1. 20 

5 

1 

p. 9, 1. 12 


Deuteronomy 


5 

4 . 

5 > 2 3 P- I S. >• 5 


1 40 — 46 

P- 3 . >• 7 

7 

27 

P- 3 . 1 


2 15 

p. 2, I. 9 

10 

10 

p. 12, 1. 20 


5 12 

p. 10, 1. 17 

11 

14 

p. II, 1 . 22 


7 8 

p. 8, 1. 15 

11 

36 

p. 11, l. 17 


7 9 

p. 19, 1. 2 bis 

11 

43 

p. 12, 11. n, 12, 13 


9 5 

p. 8, 1. 15 

11 

46 

p. 12, 11 . 12, 13 


9 * 3 > 24 

P- 3 . 1 - 7 

11 

47 

p. 6, 1. 17 ; p. 12, 

1. 20 

12 a 

p. 6, 1. 14 

14 

7 

P- 9 - 1 - 9 


13 6 

p. 5, I. 21; p. 12 1. 3 

16 

6 

p- 3 > 1 - 18 


15 2 

p. 10, I. 18 

17 

16 

P- J 5 > >• 5 


17 6 

p. 10, 1. I 

18 

5 

p. 3 . '• 16 


17 20 

p. s. 1- 2 

18 

13 

P- 5 . >• 9 


19 14 

p. 1, 1 . 6 

19 

7 

p. 9, 1. 8 


19 15 

p. 10, 1. 1 

19 

1 2 

]>• i 5 . '• 3 


22 20 

P- 9 . *• 3 

19 

17 

P- 7 , 2, 3 


23 24 

p. 16, V . 7 

19 

18 

p. 6, 1 21 


28 21 

p. 1, 1. 17 

20 

25 

p. 7, I. 4 


28 29 

p. 1, 1. 9 

23 

38 

p. 11, 1. 18 


28 33 

p. 13, 1. 10 

26 

21 

p. 20, 1 . 29 


29 21 

p. 1, 1. 17 

26 

25 

p. 1, 1. 18; p. 19, 

1- 13 

32 28 

P- 5 . 1-17 

26 

33 

p. 3. 1. 10 


32 33 

p. 8, 1. 10 

* The references in this Index 

are to the page and line of the Hebrew text and 


corresponding notes in the English translation. 


• 7 . J by Micros of i'P 


lxii 


INDEX 


Joshua 


* 15 


P- 

1, l 

'9 

8 31 


P- 

19, 1. 

1 

19 1 


P- 

i 3 ? 1- 

4 

Judges 

2 13 


P- 

5. 1- 

4 

3 15 


P* 

i, 1. 

11 

17 6 


P- 

3 . 1. 

6 

i Samuel 

2 35 


P- 

3 . 1. 

19 

20 2 


P- 

2, 1. 

2 

22 8 


P- 

2, 1. 

2 

25 6, 

3 i 

P- 

9. 1. 

9 

2 Samuel 

15 4 


P* 

14, 1. 

12 

1 Kings 

!5 5 


P- 

5 . 1. 

5 

2 Kings 

6 20 


P- 

3 , 1. 

16 

Isaiah 

1 4 


P- 

6, 1. 

15 

2 17 


P- 

1, 1. 

15 

5 22 


P- 

19, 1. 

!9 

5 23 


P- 

2, 1. 

21 

7 17 


P- 

7 , 1. 

ii ; p. 14, 1. 1 

8 T 5 


P- 

7 , 1 . 

12 

10 2 


P- 

6, 1. 

17 

14 1 


P- 

4, I- 

I I 

22 11 


P- 

3 . I- 

8 

24 17 


P- 

4, 1. 

14 

24 18 


P* 

4, I- 

19 

27 6 


P- 

2, 1. 

12 

27 11 


P- 

5. 1. 

16 

28 14 


P- 

i, 1. 

14 

30 10 


P- 

1, 1. 

18 

40 11 


P- 

13. 1- 

9 

50 11 


P* 

5. 1. 

13 bis 

51 7 


P- 

1, 1. 

1 

54 13 


P- 

20, 1 . 

4 

54 16 


P- 

6, 1 . 

8 

56 4 


P- 

37 1- 

12 

56 6 


P- 

11, 1. 

2 

58 7 


P- 

13, 1* 

10 

58 13 


P- 

10, 1. 

18 

59 4, 

5 

P- 

5 , 1. 

14 

59 10 


P- 

I, 1. 

9 

59 20 


P- 

2, 1. 

5 

59 21 


P- 

20, 1. 

17 

60 21 


P- 

I, 1. 

7 

Jeremiah 

9 1 


P- 

I, 1. 

1 2 

13 ro 


P- 

37 h 

3 


17 

6 

p- 

5. 1 . 

15 

24 

10 

p- 

2, 1. 

9 

25 

3 i 

p- 

i, 11, 

• 2, 4 

30 

17 

p- 

14, 1. 

16 

31 

3 ° 

p- 

6, 1. 

19 

34 

10 

p- 

2, 1. 

2 

48 

44 

p- 

4 , 1 - 

19 

Ezekiel 

4 

5 

P- 

I, 1. 

6 

9 

4 

P- 

19, 1. 

12 

9 

l 4 

P- 

2, 1. 

7 

11 

15 

P- 

3 , 1 - 18 

13 

9 

P- 

19, 1. 

35 

13 

10 

P- 

4 , 1 - 

19 

14 

4 j 5 

P- 

4, 1. 16 

14 

21 

P- 

2, 1. 

1 1 

16 

49 

P- 

6, 1. 

21; p. 14, 1. 14 

21 

30 

P- 

6, 1. 

10 

31 

1 2 

P- 

6, 1. 

7 

33 

24 

P- 

3 . 1 - 

18 

36 

17 

P- 

2, 1. 

1 

44 

15 

P- 

4, 1. 

2 

47 

7 

P- 

1, 1. 

20 

Hosea 

3 

4 

p- 

20, 1. 

16 

4 

1 

p- 

I, 1. 

2 

4 

16 

p- 

I, 1. 

14 

5 

1 

p- 

137 I* 

7 

5 

10 

p- 

8, 1. 

3; p. 19, 1. 16 

5 

1 1 

p- 

4 , 1 . 

19 

5 

13 

p- 

8, l 

4 

10 

12 

p- 

1, 1. 

1 1 

14 

1 

p- 

5. i- 

15 

Amos 

2 

9 

P- 

3. i- 

4 

5 

26 

P- 

7 , i- 

14 

Obadiah 


IS 

P- 

2, 1. 

20 

Micah 

2 

6 

P- 

1, 1. 

!5 

2 

1 1 

P- 

1, 1. 

15 i P- 2 °) 1. 25 bis 

3 

9 

P- 

2, i. 

6 

6 

6, 11 

P- 

4, 1 . 

20 

7 

2 

P* 

1 6, 1. 

i 5 

7 

1 1 

P* 

4 , 1 . 

12 

Nahum 

1 2 

Zechariah 

P- 

9 , I- 

5 

6 

12 

P- 

1, ]. 

7 

11 

7 

P- 

19, 1. 

9 

13 

7 

P- 

19, 1. 

8 


Die i • i r..*t > o v Micro o i: 


INDEX 


lxiii 


Malachi 



2 Chronicles 


1 10 

p. 6, 11. 13, 

14 

23 19 

p. 1 1, 1. 22 

3 i 

p. 14, 1. 2 


New Testament 


3 1 6 

p. 20, 1. 20 


Matthew 


3 18 

p. 20, 11. 20, 

21 

21 3 

p. 4. i- 21 

Psalms 



‘John 


10 ii 

P- 1, l- 3 


13 34 

p. 6, 1. 21 

29 7 

p. 2, 1. s 


15 12 

p. 6, 1. 21 

33 15 

p. 1, 1. 10 


Romans 


49 4 

p. 10, 1. 6 


12 10, 19 

p. 6, 1. 21 

78 6 

p. 1, 1. 12 


1 Corinthians 


94 6 

p. 6, 1. 17 


11 25 

p. 6, 1. 19 

94 2i 

p. 1, 1. 20 


2 Timothy 


101 6 

p. 2, 11. 15, 

l6 

3 8 

p. 5, 1. 19 

106 25 

p. 3, 1. 8 


Hebrews 


106 33 

P- 3 . 1 - 7 


8 8 

p. 6, 1. 19 

106 40 

p. 2, 1. 1 ; 

P- 3 > 1 * 9 

James 


107 18 

p. 1, 1. 21 


2 23 

P- 3 . 2 

107 40 

p. 1, 1. 15 


2 Peter 


Ruth 



2 14 

p. 2, 1. 16 

3 9, 12 

p. 14, 1. 15 


Apocryphal 


Proverbs 



Ecclesiasticus (Heb.) 

2 19 

p. 6, 1. 10 


42 19 

p. 2, 1. 10 

6 18 

p. 8, 1. 6 


Book of Enoch 


8 12 

p. 2, 1. 4 


1 5 

p- 3. >• 4 

8 32 

P- 3 . 1 


1 16 

p. 1, 1. 7 

15 8, 29 

p. 11, 1. 21 


7 2 

p- 3. i- 4 

16 5 

p- 13. 1- 15 


Book of Jubilees 


17 15 

p. 1, 1. 19 


1 14 

p. 3, 1. 16 

22 3 

p. 1, 1. 15 


1 20 

p. 2, 1. 13; p. 4, 11. 13, 16 

29 6 

P- 3 . 1 - 17 


1 21 

p. 2, 1. 13 

Job 



1 27 

p. 5, 1. 18 

10 19 

p. 2, 1. 20 


2 1 

p. 5, 1. 18 

27 18 

P- 5 > I- iS 


2 29 

p. 10, 1. 22 ; p. 11, 11. 2, 7, 

37 14 

p. 1, 1. 2 


2 30 

p. 11, 1. 8 

Lamentations 



3 7 

p. 4, 1. 21 

2 14 

p. 4. 1- 19 


4 6 

p. 3 - 1- 6 

Esther 



4 16 

p. 2, 1. l8 

1 8 

p. 3, 1. 12 


4 24 

p. 2, 1. 20 

Daniel 



6 12, 18 

P- 3. l- 1 

* 3 

p. 6, 1. 21 


6 19 

p- 3. ll- 2, 3 

9 2, 24 

p. 1, 1. 6 


6 34 

p. 3. i- 16 

10 14 

P- 4 . 1- 3 


6 37 

p. 3, 1. 16; p. 6, 1. 17 

Ezra 



7 2 

p. 6, 1. 21 

2 63 

p. 6, 1. 10 


7 21 

p. 4, 1. 18 

6 21 

p- 7. i- 3 


10 8 

p. 16, 1. 5 

Nehemiah 



15 26 

p. 6, 1. 15 ; p. 16, 1. 6 

7 65 

p. 6, 1. 10 


15 32 

p. 16, 1. 6 

1 Chronicles 



19 9 

p. 3, 11. 2, 4 

21 18 

p. 8, 1. 4 


21 18 

p- 3. •• 3 

29 9 

p. I, 1. IO 


23 11 

p. 10, 1. 10 


Digrtihiii by Microsoft f " 


Ixiv INDEX 


Book of Jubilees (contd.) 

Gittin 


23 

i 9 

p. 3 , 1 - 

4 6 

p. 12, 1. 11 

23 

21 

p. 4 - 1 . 17 

Shebuoth 


30 

r 5 

p. 4 , 1 . 18 

4 13 

p. 15, 1. 1 

30 

21 

P- 3 , 1 - 4 

Aboda Zarah 

32 

1 1 

p. 6, 1. 20 

1 8, 

9 p. 12, 1 . 9 

36 

4-8 

p. 6. 1. 21 

Kelim 


48 

2—9 

p. 5, 1. 18 

12 3 

p. 12, 1. l8 

50 

8 

p. IO, 1 . 21 ; p. II, 11 . 2, 8 

Negaim 


50 

9 

p. 10, I. 2 2 

3 i 

P- 13, 1 - 6 

50 

IO 

p. II, 1 . l8 

Tosefta 


50 

12 

p. II, L 4 

6 10 

p. II, 1. IO 

Testaments of the Twelve Patriarchs 

Sifra 


Reuben 



39 a 

p. 12, 1. 14 

5 

6 

p. 2, 1. 1 8 

60 a 

p. 13, 1. 6 

Simon 



Sifre 


4 

7 

p. 6, 1 . 21 

35 a 

p. 2, 1 . 16 

Levi 



Aboth d’Rabbi Nathan 

9 

9 

p. 4 , 1 . 18 

5 a 

p. 4, 1. 21 

14 

4 

p. 4, 1 . 16 

Masecheth Sopherin (ed. Muller) 

14 

5 

p. 4, 11. 1 6, 1 8 ; p. 6, 1. 16 

pp. vii, 58 

p. 15, 1. I 

14 

8 

p. 4, 1. 18 

Jer. Berachoth 


16 

i 

p. i, 1 . 6 

2b 

p. 10, 1. 15 

16 

2 

p. 7, 1. 18 

Jer. Kiddushin 


17 

2 

p. i, 1 . 6 

6 6 a 

p. IO, 1. 4 

17 

3 

p. 7, 1 . 20 

Jer. Sanhedrin 


Judah 



28^ 

p. 15, 1. I 

24 

5 

p. i, 1. 6 

T. B. Shabbath 


Issachar 



65 a 

p. II, 1 . IO 

5 

2 

p. 6, 1 . 21 

129b 

p. II, 1 . 14 

7 

2 

p. 2, 1. 16 

14 6a 

p. II, 1. 9 

7 

6 

p. 6, 1. 21 

150a 

p. 10, 1. 18 

Naphtali 



Erubin 


3 

I 

p. 3, 1 . 12 

4 b 

p. IO, 1. II 

3 

3 , 5 

p. 2, 1. 18 

Rosh Hashanah 

Gad 



9 a 

p. 10, 1. 17 

4 

2 

p. 6, 1 . 21 • p. 9, 1. 3 

Yoma 


4 

5 

P- 9 . 1 - 3 

84 

p. II, 1 . 17 

Benjamin 



Baba Kama 


2 

3 

p. 6, 1. 21 

27 b 

p. 9, 1 . 9 

Mishna 



Baba Mezia 


Bikkurim 


28^ 

p. 9, 1. 11 


3 2 

p. IO, 1 . 19 

Shebuoth 


Shabbath 


35 « 

p. 15, 1. 1 


6 6 

p. II, 1 . IO 

38 b 

p. 15, 1. 2 


18 2 

p. II, 1 . II 

Chullin 



18 3 

p. 11, 1. 13 

27 b 

p. 12, 1. 15 

Beza 



Kerithoth 



1 2 

p. IO, 1. 2 2 

20 b 

p. 12, 1. 14 


5 2 

? 




Dig ' / iz e ct b . Mic/ os o 1 1 1 ■ 


Digitized by Micrc on •) 





'Jirjh zc l i Microi.oii ft 



Facsimile of page 20. Text B 





20 


aat?an pi bxn^'ai pnxa n't?a may ny n'n\n nma 
anp' nips m^ya pip-i enpn B’an 'mx my 'xa bab 
nnya rtfin l'tpya yaina : ma pina pnm a*xn xin 
'ma lnumar -m ibya 'aa bx mab pina ibnu baj x^tr iaa 
-px-na*x- mp D'an 'box nayaa nayb an?' dv ny mya 5 
labnm na>x minn anna 'aa vt?ya yainai -pm a -i bm :i 
nmayai pna lay mu nix' m bx enpn D'an 'box 12 
D'jie\sna axan bab n?n aa&?aai p'by 'Bmp ba ihihnx '2 
nimnan iabn cab by c'bib: w n^x D'jnnxai 
i 2 tr ntrx amyn aat?aa : minn n'22 pbn cnb px cab 10 
loxai pnvn 'pn by nyin nan '2 taas?' pxbn 'fc?jx cy 
: ntnnn nma xim pcran pnxa ia'p new maxi nnaa 
Dvai minn n'22 pbn amnina^abi cnb nw xbi 
iabn nt?x nanban 'box ba cn ny n'n'.n nhi' spxn 
nnn' xinn ppai : B'yanx aoBn aian ma cy *s 
pxi bsm? pxi ntr pxi pba px nax npxa bxnam bx px 
etx . . . m . . ?x bx n'na nae> . . . ' yen 'acn pma n'aia 
acrp'i bx "pna any* pan' vnx nx vm b .. yn bx 
'atnnb bx 'xn'b . . par naa ana'i yearn cn'nan bx bx 
p'ns pa cmxm anaen bx 'xn'b npmi yen hby' ny . iac? 20 
vanish . . non n»jn : may xb npxb b . nay pa yarn 
: enpn n'ya ixir n»x jbamaa : mn pbxb vnairbi 
ny iaan anpan nx lxaai bxn&r bya ppa bx by oyam 
mya ia$^: mm 'ab^ab . . . aya D'nana cyn -paj : bx 
yaina n'nan 'xaa nninn biaa nx una na\x bai : amp 25 
'y'tma ba cnayi nman anpa inna' bxna”b bx maa 
nxxb nbxn anac’ea a'pnnan bai vniama 'an nmn' 
ux . . . bx 'jab min'i nma bipb lyaam nninn 'a by xiabi 
n'nan 'pna 'np cnaba urniax dj unjx . . xi uyan 
aac'ai lamp 'pn by n' ia'n' xm : ua "peat^a naxi 3^ 
nc’x-aoia'xnn D'aaaaa lnamni : max nnnyi 1 pnx 
•n*er xbi : pm nma bipb u'txm n'n'n *aox 02 ieaao 
naan'i cab iyn lnaam vtr'm anx ayecn pmn 'pn bx 
lamp Ban ion 'a wyiana ixm anya bx naai ban 'ia na by 


19 


"iDnm nnan nai^ aa : nnn 'sSsS anvnS anS nuasj 
'pina lair nima asi : “in ci'sS mixa na^Si ansS 
Baa n'bim nmnn anjaa b'bo inpSi Dips mn n^s pan 
mmn -paa amom as^aai : nmnn *s Sy laSnmi 
mxaa B'Dsan Sai uaS as pi mB>sS B>'« r nas n^sa 5 
pnsn jin Ss “ipsa an*Sy B'yen Sia: a'amS a'pnai 
Sy my am s'am nnar ma ama nt?s nann siaa 
}s*n nrmsm nynn ns “in 's djo 'may na:i Syi 'yn 
jsxn ":y an mis a'naiemi : D'nyixn Sy m mia^ni 
m^a siaa annS naa' ansami mpsn ppa mSa* nSs 10 
^pim nas na>s ppsnn nnps ppa n\n nsrsa : Ssnam pns 
D'p:s:i amx: niniia Sy vnn mnnS w Sspim ma 
\x3 bib asa>a pi : nna ap: napu annS man ansaom 
Sy'Sa “i*a nSaS anpsS a*pnn nSsa ip'tm sS n^s* inna 
*j'^aa min' ntr vn nan ntrsa 'si nps' nt?s avn s*m 15 
naiam n'naa is*a 'a : may a'aa “pps* an'Sy S12J 
nyann pnai nw 'ama iSSymi amia *pna na sSi 
t?'s laSymi myn ns* sms* s:&h imnsS e>'s mail aipai 
ns it^y'i ymSi pnS nam'i na b lewi intya ns^a 
aya na sSi iaS nimnsra p's nna'i imya nem a>\s* 20 
“ia>s : B'yan 'ama naSS nan n'a iyns'i : ansanai 
a'j'jnn : mas Bans srsni a O" aaan nan an'Sy 's nas 
a’sn sin aans a'sm an'ann sin am a'ayn 'aSa 
ma a'an sS nSs Saai nap: ap:S emSy san p» *aSa 
ans p|'aai nisia ma bpv 1 nn “|Sm 'a San mai p'nn 25 
na»a nas* nt^si : inny Saa Ss p|s nnn n^s aiaS 
a'an ns na>nS sa nns “paS namai “jnpmn sS Ssn^'S 
p : nyiaam ns naa^ai *]'mas ns inansa 'a nSs*n 
a'^snn ns Ss* nansa ayn “pna na Ssn&?' 'aa>S astra. 
anS 'a an'nns B'san ns ansi *s 'nns* ayn Vy n'yn n^s 30 
Saai aa iss -ss- nnm p'nn '31a ns ^ aynai s:itn mas n'na 
's niiiaa asan SaS nin as^aai an'nns a'aSnn 
n'naa isa na>s a'^sn Sa p aaS nin'ntra ub*i aatyn 
: a"nn B'B nsaa nia'i nfan 13^1 paan pnsa nmnn 

s]bsh ava iana* sS nnaai ay maa laErri'.S 35 
I'lgitizfci by Microsoft /" 


Oigthzco iV. Microsoft '■ 


s 









D‘ rtrcd by Mfcroscfi ^ 






16 


bx m^b -ps: by p*xn Dip' p by bxam ba Dyi nna oaay 
paiyb Dn'i'p btibi papiaa San na 'a nt?a min 
D'nyn ropbna aso by papina xin nan nbx baa bxaea 
ai^b 1^23 by s?'xn nip' apx aval orrmyiatm Dn'bavb 
man nx D'p' dx mnxa naaD'an *jxba aio* ntra min bx 5 
*]'ns^ xxia aax at?xi mya ova nmax Sia'a p by 
lca'sa by mx Dip' n&?x aax nyiatr ba D’pnb aiasrn 
n^x ba im2’ bx ma Tna ay minn ja am nia*yb 
ina'p' bx ma a'na ay .... b tpm by fc?'x . . . 
bx nnyiap nx xunb 7 \w . . . ax a^x n^x.a nyiaa* . ,10 
x'iab dxi xin D'pnb Da . . ya . xb ae>x nyia^ trx xu' 
n'axb aatyan pi naa'p' bxi nxu' xin n'aa aiayb dx 
dji dux Dixa naiab mx arp bx ni . . n asa>a by 
baxa nx mx &np' .... bxam nxa inp' bx D'aa . , 
bxi Dan 1 . . 1a . y nx e>'x aax at?x xin ’ . b . . . *5 
intnx ............. *?aa ..... p' 

♦ ♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦■♦♦♦♦♦•«♦ 


* 


♦ ♦ 
* 



♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ ♦ 20 

* * 


15 


. . an nyiatr ax o nVm e^xa ail naSi cjbxa bji y . . 

. . . . 'a mar Sx nfc?a nmn nxi man mSxa 
. . . man mSxa axi earn nx bbm nayi yaa>' axi 
. . . . xtm x*?i a'ami nmnni xm aa'x nay axi B'asam 
— px amja nx a^iy pm 1 ? btn&' SaS nnaa xam ma . 5 
pi arn^y iaip’ nnan nyiaan anipan Sy may 1 ? 
nan era nnnann lanna aam bb> yann pp Saa aaa>an 
nna na\x nnan nyiaan lamps’ D'anS na’x npaan ay 
... a 1 ? ^aa n& . . . b . . vh nnan nx Sxna” ay na>a 

nx trx myn" b>xi . . . p . . . aa m^ym x*am *?x a>S 3 10 

inx lanna ia nnsm . x . npaan ’is 1 ? nay ny a’&sa'an 
a>si baai ±> ^aa na>a nmn Sx sis’ 1 ? vSy mix a’p’ na>xai 
an 1 ? nmnn ja nSu na\x Sai . . •? . . . n ax uaa . . a’ . . . 

. . . n v*?y mm mix npaan ia . . w , . . 

. . . ^ai yji^ai n . . x man . . y . . sh . . a’a . . . na 15 

*?x . . . ny *»**». .......S.., xai 

♦ ♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦•*♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦♦*♦♦ 


♦ 20 


14 


nSxa a'aSnnan S21 min' Sya ansx ma ova 1x2 xS na\s 
. . 3 p aixns '2 iw 'a>pia Saa aS'ianS anS ni 3 ax 3 Sx n'na 
n 3 is\xnS D'nn cn'nwa 2S2 mp 3 ' nunan Sa 2 ana "jnai 
an'niaa’a lana'i y'an uni vrwbw Sxna” '121 a' 3 t? anSm 
Sxna>' '321 Q'2tr D'iSni n 3 ia\xnS aanan vrnx nnx a>'x s 
np2' na>x jn2.n1 SaS v?xa” pi 122" pi jpn n3.n1 BnanSa> 
n 3 D 2 (21222 DW j 2 nyi n 32 > D'anSt? |2D B'2nn B'X 
na>x npaani aasa'aa ananS nmnn 'asa'a Pa . . . 
S22 Sip rw a'a^an |2 nyi njtr a'a'Se* jaa nunan SaS 
nnyn 'x*2 1x2' in's by . . 'ns . an ps>S S2S1 B'eox ma 10 
n2n' npaaS nnnS anxn SaS n'n' na\x n2n S2S1 inn2 t?'x 
naa> an'xsn Sa j'anS D'2nn *ps nn ass>ai 2'n SaS 
a'asia>ni npaan t by isnai a ... an . ann SaS an jnann 
na»x jprSi ji'axi 'iy na ip'in' '3a . 1 ay . . np i3n' liaa 
na>x nSinaSi n 23 '12S? naa” . . . xSi yy na>x trxS ... 15 

. . xSi . . nmay Sa ann lS j'x n 

aana ams nn 

na»x a'asa^an ams nn 

13315? nsa'i Sxnan jnnx ...'... 

1 ynv xini jiaaa np n 

nan' na\si na'S' a’a' my 


13 


n’S'am nvx’ai d ' sbxb ayiab nmx nntyy ny bxnsm 
by oti nsan pma pa trx &o> bx mt^y nipm ronpyi 
jinn a'ibna e>'xi nbx ban pnn xin |\x axi nbm ipa>' in’s 
axi nanan ’xn bn vrs by xmbi nxxb bnan xmi nbxn 
warn nanan nayi pnn xm trxn nm' yaa nninb s'sa’a 5 
cnb 'a lanaa' xin xin ’ns axi mn nn emsn npnan 

’t?yan n'nnn nx b’nn” nanab npnan *pa nn asn>an 
rrnnsn abiy nvna nnasb nsan ’xbs ninnaa aa'nn bx 
my nynn nmnna bsb . . . am mb nxn nn’by nnnn 
innyn pni pipy an . . ’a . b nnnpp nimnn bs -in’ 10 
ami inninai mini ibmnn w . ab imps' innyb span bm 
trx bipa' bx , ...n bnan min' 'sn laipan minnm 
nanab npx npnan 's . . myn bx p\x x'nnb nanan ana 
. . man an . , p' bx bxtr bx nnn \xn bna t?'xi 
. . . nx . . nna . . abi . . ab . . trx t?y' bxi spb sp ax 15 

’ xbi na , . . nsyyi nanan nn>x npnan 

’ xim tnaab pi n 

. . . nn . . na’ bx . , an nnnxm may 

n ncrpn aa'x nn»x nxi nn ...... . 

bn . nanan anna nn 

pxn nnt?b lmbm xb nb 

.♦♦♦♦♦♦♦b.. ab . * n nb ........ 


12 


xaaS anpan mya nt?x ay trx aaa” Sx xin anip 

Sy'Sa mnn u lSarn’ x>x n&x Sa annia anpan *17 nx 

nyn’ na*x bai aatr mynm aixn aaama mo nam 

anxn '3a Sy 'a nav xS nnyian nxi naan nx SSnS 

nnxi D 1 :^ yaa> ny ininaan n 3 aa xsm axi naam 5 

B’i3.n ja B”xS an Pisa'S it nx nSa” Sx Snpn Sx xia’ 

xS na\x mays Sa B3ina xa” Sx na-j ymi pn maya 

nana 3'\x naa’ Sx Sxnc?’ man roya ax 'a isnj’ 

unuai ainar xS na>x maya a ’uS anna tjiyi 

maa* Sx max nxi nay nxi nxa Saa artS naa’ Sx vuai 10 

itrsj nx a"x ppa” Sx annax nnaa my ixa na\x an 1 ? 

a>33 Sa ny amann ’S:ya ana SaxS amnni mnn Saa 

iynp3 ax 'a iSax’ Sx a’:nni a’aa Boann nt?x nmn 

a\aa ix a\xa ixa’ anrraa a'a3nn Sai aa[n] pacm a"n 

aaaxm B’lryn Sai anxna taspa xn ’a a”n an ny 15 

’ 3 a ana ia» ’S1X3S anxn nxaaa iSxia' na>x nsym 

Smaa nn' ix naaa -naaa >Sa Sai aa yn 3 n xaa’ anxaa 

na>ya ’Sa nnx nxataa xaa' n’aa nan ay vm nt?x 

pa S’nanS nSxn amsiran Sy SxnEr ny atna pno 

a’pnn nSxi SinS anipn pa ymnSi mn&S xaan 20 

astraai nyi . . ascmS mSa ay aa pSnnnS S’araS 

atria -pa nn nxi’ xSi Sxntn ynr iaSnm nin 

pnx mtra may ny nytnn ppa .... Snn 

********* 


11 


bn axtr Sxi naiy Sy nnsr pmf? rn -pna 
na»n ova wsn nx nnyS aa:n p nx nStr *?x ^a ba 

DX 'a m D'XaiD IX D'XIX DH» vSy tTX Hp' Sx 

uwiD tj^'x myrv *?x mnSa D'Si^ ix D'laa loan 
'a rrya yin nniyaS nonan anx trx *]^ bx naan s 
ex cpajxa nman^ w nx dt Sx n&xa anbx dx 
nnn p trx xacv *?x inna nx'xv bn x*n naan 
rDDD xxv bn rrrr nana dxi nn bn pnn pi y)rb 
anx xa” Sx naan nita ,l ?a nna bn rrhn xa' bxi 
naaaa nna ^lav bn naan xnVi n nvb d':dd vby i° 
naan n)ib) n nth pjvn nx pixn xa' Sx aayi y^o 
naaa naia nxi max nxi nay nx a\x xao' bn 
an Sx bnn dxi naan ova nana a'x “6" bn -W- 
anp Dipaa t rn nna' ^x naan na'p' bn nna bxi 
naaa yxai pn ^y naan nx a’x Sn' bn naaa D'uf? 15 
DipD bxi D'D Dips -tva- bn b)%r\ aax aax as: ^ai 
naaa naia 1 ? a'x V bn 'Sai bam aSna a\x rby bn 
nba' bn aa'nwaa aaSa aina p n naan nbiy dx n 
nnxa xaa a\x an yyi mnSi nn:ai nSiy naraS t rx 
nai aina n na?an nx xaab inn’ in 1 ? nixaan p 2G 
*?x xan Vai pn nmaa tapax nSam nayin D'yaa 
bnpn nnxixn yanai Diaa xaa xa' bn ninnan nn 
n... nVn mnyn nx innr* nb) anxn' ix oapn' 


2—2 


10 


moyS vo' ixSo xS -ie\x in's Sy n'onS D'doipS my 
inyn Sy p'x px' Sx Sx nx xm D'mpsn Sy 
oipS 1 st -iy non to mmi p non noiy nyS 
D'im d'P 3 x nnpy ny myn 'dspS *po nn 
SxnP'Oi pnxi nS nooS nyonx nyn 'oS myn p 5 
npon '320 nmn 'niD'oi unn 1202 D'33120 hpp 
po niy 2 x'n' Sxi n 3 P d'pp '32 ny n 3 P D'npyi 
nnxn Syoo '2 myn nx dispS nSyoi n 3 P D'pp 
nx moS nox pxn 'opvo Sx cjx pnnoi 10' ioyo 
Sx d' 02 nnon Sy nn'O' nx io'Sp' xS ny onyn 10 
p'x S'yno 'no D'oiyoi d*xw D'02 p'x pm 
'-1 12 px -ipx ySoo X23 S21 'S2 .-102 nno' Sx 
mon '0'02 vo'o xotsi xoon 12 yj 3 -ipx S'yno 
ovo P'x py' Sx nospoo mopS n..pn Sy 
popn S3b3 n'n' -ipx nyn p noxbo 'P'Pn i 5 
nx mop nox npx xm '2 ixiSo nypn p pmn 
n 2 n P'x non' Sx nopn Di'21 iPnpS nop«n ov 
yxai pn Sy disp' Sx So inyno nP' Sx pm S23 
d'opoS nipyS nmoyni noxSon 'nano non' Sx 
'xsn nmoy nx nipyS nnpo P'x -jSnn' Sx 20 
noxo fjbx Sy nx imyS pin *]Snn' Sx nopn 
noixn pi pion dx '2 nopn dvo p'x Sox' Sx 
n3noo <mn dx *2 nnP' Sxi Sox' Sxi n.... 


9 


xin n'anS an:n 'pino ooxa din onn* new dox So 
'x'oa P'x Soi pay oo nx man xSi aipn xS "tax ot?xi 
any osS noino xS ot^x non inyo Sy x'o' opx mon 
oai:i xin Dpi: ininnS lopiS odd ix isx pono lx'oni 
vooxS xin oai:i voicS xin Dpi: dx 'o omo pxi 
ma oooo 10 non 10 isx ponoi dvS ova lS tronn dx 
noin iS oax opx Sx niva nx D'pn xS ob\n jy' 10 n:y 
o&?x nyio^n Sy xan vSy xam xSi p'yo nx main 
noam os Sy y’oir ob\x p’x pS po' py'Bon xS oax 
ooixn Soi lS vr ymo ooaxa ix D'asem dosS xS opx 
vbyo y'OB” 10 o:: ocrx n:nan oxaa io:: »a ym: xSi 
Dtrxi no' xSi xin ynv dx yaiami nSxn nyiotro 
po*? oaoan noinm D'pyo px otrx oaoa dpx So 
pxi nxxa: mox So pi Son dd'x.o S'xa ooS lS nmi 
nas^a nx n'xma yn' xS 'o D':noS nn'ni D'Syo nS 
Sya' new non So ma^' on D'Syo nS xsa: xS dx 
lnyni'i xin ma non dx nnx xvn in'yn nxm nmno tmx 
ima»y ny ito mono' npoani npoaS n'oino io'yS 
osS B'snoi oiD'' dx npoaS y'nini otsn nnx oaS my 
Sy D'n'ya Dm on Dot? dxi las^a cbw nnx 
aoax: dx noS nonan ja cmxn Snoim nnx non 
ot? iSo . .pnn Syi npoaS ny'ov t?'xn mxn ai'oi an 
Dip' Sxi nonan S'nonS nnx Syi D':ax: D'n*y 


5 

io 

x 5 

20 


8 


nt?x mm2 'X2 ^2 os^o pi 2nnb nnon oniomi 
dvh xm bybn rn rbib mpW? nSx2 ipnn' nb 
nn2yn crvSy y&vr\ no\x min' nt? vn bn nps' no\x 
■pno no nb ne\xo onmo “22 DiopTi xsno 1 ? iSn' '2 
mom oipn nyen jinm nun 'mm l^Snn'i cnm 5 
nsm nxeo mx iobynn myn nx p'x xwi vnxS 0"x 
1072 nsm mx io>yn yxnSi pnS imjn'i noiS ionn 
non T2 iynsn cyo inn x^i 12^ ninneo mx nn2'i 
D 3 " onon non on'Sy bn nox nsrx D'yon pn2 noSS 
xm D3"i D'oyn '2S0 on ononn nox onns o’xm 10 
onn ni^yS xnn p» '2^0 ^xn xm onnsn o\xni on'onn 
'2 Ssnn mm pnn '012 wan nb nSx S221 nop: 
mny boo bx sjx nnn no\x d nb sj'nn 212 tpooi nm bnioo 
nonb X2 nnx “pob nomi *]npns2 xb n&?o nox n^xi 
nyioom nx ioospoi *]niox nx inonxo '2 rf?xn onm nx 15 
nx bx nonxo oyn “poo mo bxoe>' ' 20 >b os^on pi 
onb '2 nn'nnx D'xon nx 2nx vonx in'ym oo\x ono'xvt 
02^021 lax nnn pnn mo nx \sniooi nioxn nno 
nob nionpo ns'i ooryo bn mxoo oxion bob nm 
y^'bxi nm: p pno 1 ? n'on' nox new 020,0 xm 

po'on pxo nennn n'n22 1x2 os?x D'ooxn bo my: 'in: 1 ? 
********* 


20 


7 


nuun ja mrb ntn nxcn trx Sya' xSi vrnx 
mt^S xbi msaa imnx nx trx main 1 ? aaa'aa 
pptr xSi caatyaa nixaan Saa SnanSi ovS ova 
o'aSnnan Sa onS bx bn an nt?xa vonp nn nx trx 
onb nuaxj bx nna tod* ba '3 by trip D'ana nbxa 5 
mpbi pxn *]iD3 latr niuna oxi nn sjbx oni'rt? 
astyaai nninn ’3 by labnnni o'ja n'bim o'tjo 
nx pai intrxb trx pa nax ntrxa nninn -poa onion 
o'ytn biaj n'onb pxn nx bx npsa o’oxian *731 uab 
x'an pax p mytr nana nina ntrx nnnn xiaa omby 1° 
nrx on' -px nn byi “joy byi “pby xia' nax ntrx 
bxntr na 'w nana min' bya onax mo ova lxa 
o'p'inam annb lmon o'jiojn bai mvr bya o'nsx ncr 
oaaba mao nx 'mbnm nax ntpxa pax pxb itaban 
naiD on minn 'nao pt?an 'bnxa oarabs jva nxi 15 
"jban nban nn naio nx 'ma'pm nax nrxa “jban 
o'x'an '“iso on o'abxn fvai o'abstn 'lrai bnpn xi n 
nninn trm xm aaiani onnan nx bxntr n?a nt?x 
aaty opi apy'a aaia -jm aina ntyxa pt? an xan 
npnpi mayai nnyn ba x'tm xin aaon bxntra 20 
ptrsnn nmpsn ppa laba nbx nt? 'ja ba nx 


6 


anxa Sxat?’ nx aW? apt? ixa:n tnipn in’traa 
Sxasy’Di naia: pnxa npa aatyxa nnj Sx aan bx 
man Dn^ masn axa axan nx ninnn Dyaam a'ann 
on rrasmi nainn x\a axan ppmaa nyn 'an: 
p^an paxa vnn min’ pnxa aasama *?x"i^' 'iw 5 
nannn ah) vim 'a ans? nSia nx *?x xnp nn\x 
ae>x nninn ann xm ppmam nnx ’na nnnxs 
an nyn ’ann m’e'yab ^n xnna mytr’ aax 
ppinan ppn na\x mppinaa axan nx mnnS D’xan 
nay ay wt?’ xS nn^n y'&'nn pp ^aa naa -j^nnn 1 ? 10 
nnaa ixarr ntrx Sai D’a’n nnnxa paxn nnv 
nana vn’i ina?a n'xnb enpan *?x xia 'nSab 
’nara n’xn xbi mba nan' aaa 'a Sx aax n&yx rbm 
SaanVi ytnn yjh namn nnnsn ni^y 1 ? nan” ab nx am 
nanm aa:a xaan nyann pna ann*n nnnn aaa 15 
cbb& naabx nvnS lay ’ay nx bnaSi nnpan pnai 
pa ymnSi ana 1 ? xaan pa bnmb) mm’ dw nxi 
nnyian nxi nnnasa natna nv nx aiae6i b)rb nmpn 
pn>aa paxa nnnnn n’aan \xa . . x*aa naynn nv nxi 
mmx nx p’x anx^ nn’&na’na D'nnpn nx annS 20 
vbv nx trx nnnaSi an p’axi ay a’a pannSi man 


5 


aina xmn ^yi nann ba lxa d’jb' a^ nann \sni 
as\x ainnn nainn asaa xap xb aaai D't?i i 1 ? naa' x 1 ? 
aiybx mo ova *?xat?n nns: ah n paxa n\a 
paaa mwjin nx nay at?x B'ipjm yean yanna 
nmx an aa^a n'n 't?ya iSyn pm may ay nf?M 
on }\s* “ie^x anpan nx an B'xaaa an *?x i 1 ? aa?ya 
anpfa Ha'll aa nx nxnn ay anaiaa nmna bnaa 
*?x aax na>ai minx na nxi anmx na nx trx 
ana: 1 ? mnyn asa'ai xn pax axt? aapn xb pax mnx 
nx nny nx nxn na nbjn axi a % wn ana: aina xn 
pa^ai ixbd emanp nn nx an axa> xm max 
nayim mdj vb aaxS Sx nna "pin Sy ns nns ann: 
nip 'pn nyaai a\x imp aSa aa anaaa an 
amSx anpn amxn a'nys* arai annip traay 
Hps wsb'tob ax 'a pn 1 ?: ax n bb\s" inn ana npn xS 
xn mna ay x 1 ? n anp^ya isx ana amtyya nx *?x 
aay Msf?a n nna ana px aawa may aax a: an 
nxi nn 1 nx SySa apa amxn aa> an pnxi rw a 
nmxan nx bxatr ytrna ina:aa innx 
bxaty’ nx lyna Sian *naa nay paxn jaan ppai 
an nan an ba mxa by naa naa n paxn Ba>ni 


5 

10 

*5 

20 


4 


bxnc? 4 4 Ja myna ltnpo nnat^a ms 4 nsty nt?x pm 
Sxna” 4 atr on D 4 :nan Dm aVn 'b wry DmSya 
4 n 4 na on pm 'ja'i Dnay DnVm nmm pnxa D'xxvn 
anna mn dw mnnxa onayn navi 4 xnp Vxna” 
aan d mnm naaai Dnaya ppi cmnSinb amniaa* 
nsa na\x D'aicr a>mpn on 4 t?ya pitm annum 
□mnnx D 4 xan Sai yan lywi pm lpmn onya bx 
d 4 ^ ny DUPxnn u ncmn na\x 4 nmnn annsa ma’yS 
naab D 4 :a>xnS Sx D'pn na\x nnaa nbxn cua'n ppn 
nuan naoaS ppn ctam cnya ba naa 4 p amnuiy by 
by a”x mayb dx 4 a min 4 mab nananb my px nbxn 
n 4 n 4 nbxn Dua'n baai pmn pnn run nnua mo 
p x 4 a3n n 4 ya” ma bx nan na’xa bxntra nbwa by 4 ba 
ma pnxn atm 4 -pby na nns) nna naxb pax 
apy 4 p 4 ib amby nax na*x by 4 ba nma nanba* 
u 4 a nanba^b anus a:nn bxna^a nna a>an xin ntrx 
ma^bam pnn nua>n nmn x 4 ,n njisrxnn pnxn 
a*an 4 ma bxum ma a>am ma nbiyn anpan xaa 
epaa xin ixn w nnx )jbn na\x pnn ma ma 
nnpb nura awa a’a'snu on ps 4 a 4 spn nax na\x 
amx xna napji nai nx 4 nan mDn an 4, na n 4 au w 


5 

io 

T 5 

20 


3 


anna: on na on . nnscyai n: *:a *yn na 
ana *b\ ba nwa naan an . . , yn na p^n ab annax 
anmx nnan rwi apjrh pnc^ “i®an vm P*" 13 
noyn Da iyn apjp oa abiyS nna '*?yai Sx 1 ? 
by yy'rh aa 1 ? nnnan n*?n anxaa an':a: doub'C 5 
man can nx taxa yyya atm trx nitrySi *?x nraa 
iyaa> xVi ann nx wn by anpa an 1 ? nanaa annt 
Sx ?|X ana an^nxa :::nn array nwa an'by Sip 1 ? 
n Dnma'J'i nna: n ann*?ai nax b an’:a: annya 
n:a'i a':a\snn nnan \xa nn n naat? n anxi nax 10 
mans? nnx nna amna nnaa *?x nna nx aarya ann 1 ? 

Sx nrcaa a'pnnaai ma nx trx ni^yS aa 1 ? 
nbb d by ay *?xa vb nna nx Sx c'pn on, a nm: nt?x 
nyiai lenp nnap Sxna” *?a aa lyn a^x nnna: an 1 ? 
na*y' a^x uran arsm nax nan ipnx nn*y nna 15 
ana a'a 1 ? axa nsna an':*) 1 ? nna ana nm aaxn 
na: naaai en:x yana bhwn on nn' ab annxiai 
ayan 1 ? xan a:iy aya nsa W?a aaa *?xi xn )b n naxa 
nyi aosVa 1 ? naa aay ab na’x Sxa^n fax: nn an 1 ? ;aa 
atrxa xin an 1 ? aax ana *?ai nx: "nS n a'pnnan nm 20 
oai (?)aa l ?ni a':nan aax 1 ? xn:n ^xprn’ an an 1 ? bx a'pn 


1—2 


2 


wsS nn:S an'^yai aaiian Sa nx bbtiS annya Sx 
'anna dmix rbm nna 'xa So 'Sx iyw nny'i 
v»S a'xn nnanni naan nyn anx Sx a'ysn 
nin'Sa ami nay B'sx "px ninns?' an nyni nany 
trx 'anSa nSn: nani nnnjn nni ya>s w nya naaS 5 
nnw pxS pn 'ayna^ pn mo Sy San 'axSa Sa u 
yr now aiaai aSiy anpa ana Sx nna xS 'a iaS na'Sai 
pxn ja vja nx nnan ana nnn nx aynn an't^ya nx 
SaS an'xp annsi nsaai naya w nx ynn aain ny \a 
aSiy w SaS an'xpa xia' na ny n "n:i B'aSty nn x° 
xSaSi pxS na'Sa nnn jyaS a^ 'xnp h a'pn aSiaai 
xm imp nn n’tya n'a aynn aynia San aa 
nynn x:ty npx nxi an'nw w annaai nax 
'iyyaa panSi mxnS aaa'y nSjxi 'S lyaty aaa nnyi 
a\an *]SnnnS xjp nt?xa aixaSi nxn ntyx nx ninaSi Sx 15 
a'an 'a mar ayi nasyx nx' nwnaa nnS xSi van Saa 
nnwa anaSa n:n nyi aaaSa aa bum S'n nm) aa lyn 
Sx roxa nap xS n»x unx: na awn ny b a: aaS 
"iSs: 'a an'nvu annai ana; annx ana npx anaai 

X T 

nx anipya vn xSa vnn yu 'a nanna nn ncya Sa 
aa iax nnn npx ny an'py mxa nx nw xSi am*n 




20 


1 


'B'yoa irai pax yiv Sa iyam nnyi I 
vxx:o Saa npy* oaew aa>n Va ay b an o *?x 
lanpooi *?xaeno v:a aman maty aa>x aSjnoa 'a 
nnxp i'xbti aama nna nam am 1 ? ana 
roxo &bv a>x? pin ppm nSab Don: xSi bxivb 5 
Saa *f?o axxnaia: an anix inn 1 ? a 'yarn 
sna^ nyoo anit? paxoi bvrera nan Dips 
'a lyaa a:iya to lnoax ana lann ixax nx 
“pa Dwpooni aniya vna an dwpx dwjx 
imana a^a 'a anwyo *?x Vx jan anmy a^m 10 
yan in 1 ? "pan annan 1 ? pax naio an 1 ? apa 
anna mya pnnx ana n^y na>x nx aonnx nnn 1 ? 
nahia nasa rrSy ninn n\a amx nyn x\a “pa no an 
bxa^^ span amx px*?n trx aiayn bxacr aaa ja 
aiaVi a^iy ninn: nvrb paa x 1 ? ininn ayna ata wo i 5 
jyo*? anSmn a’jtrxa lSa: amx bm yobi pax na’roo 
ap: nap: aanS aa^anS innn niSx nx ana paan 
isxa nbnnon nnaa nipSnn lcna amx aiaya nna 
pnx lywaa yan lpnxa axixn man nnaa nixaa 1 ? 
n^m ^nni pnx an: Sy nua pin nna nna nnya 20 
?)X ana ay an 1 ? idwi aana aisaaa Ban: nayn ann 


1 



« • T-S. 10 K 6 

CAMB. 



M 

'll 




I 




« 


i 


yi&ya ppy whptv^v . h 
\ srfS? wi wy'rnvw •■#& *73 it" 3'"! « *« *3 

#iraw i^D 'thyxo'S^ ^ 

tj'jwwi jrct \i5fcf#ro aw \ 

jwy win ^]>i\ kVi V^'V- « 

tok 3 toi:u bjww 

wnxv&p w'yw ytnkat >^'^aYjy3‘tr>s. ■■ 

t> •jr-t',} t$» ■ 
yt /sw^hsi 1 
W'*ri w£> ate a w^a WSk W . Ij 

tA^i£ni^ww 2 iwr d 


“pi vys S* 


I 


V^H 7 «$*»$2J;3 W>' T©AjE. 

^»Vt>V r^&atfw 3 t 3 ^ .•/ 

w>V $w to j\fct\)2 

awjfijw ywv tn^wV^-is ' '« 

WP&fsVihz % 

P^m\cr^\y^ "vuyw istea #w>i j«n» 

\ Web to/ mvi wn ^wS&onm vifSV't 



Facsimile of page i. Text A 


